HTSUS Chapter 52 — Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, Revision 18 (2026).
Text extracted from the PDF at https://hts.usitc.gov/reststop/file?release=currentRelease&filename=Chapter%2052
(pages 1 only; "=== page N ===" marks the PDF page, addressable as #page=N).

=== page 1 ===
CHAPTER 52
COTTON
XI
52-1
Subheading Note
1. For the purposes of subheadings 5209.42 and 5211.42, the expression "denim" means fabrics of yarns of different colors, of
3-thread or 4-thread twill, including broken twill, warp faced, the warp yarns of which are of one and the same color and the weft
yarns of which are unbleached, bleached, dyed grey or colored a lighter shade of the color of the warp yarns.
Additional U.S. Notes
1. Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, the staple length of cotton shall be determined for all customs
purposes by application of the Official Cotton Standards of the United States for length of staple, as established by the Secretary
of Agriculture and in effect when the determination is to be made.
2. For the purposes of classifying yarns of headings 5205 and 5206 the term "nm," as applied in these headings, means the number
of 1,000-meter lengths of yarn in one kilogram. To determine the nm measurement of any yarn, whether single, multiple (folded)
or cabled, the actual meters per kilogram shall be divided by 1,000 and the quotient thereof multiplied by the number of single
yarns therein, including the single yarns used in manufacturing multiple (folded) or cabled yarns.
3. For the purposes of the woven fabrics of chapter 52:
(a) The term "number," as applied to woven fabrics of cotton, means the average yarn number of the yarns contained therein.
In computing the average yarn number, the length of the yarn is considered to be equal to the distance covered by it in the
fabric in the condition as imported, with all clipped yarn being measured as if continuous and with the count being taken of
the total single yarns in the fabric including the single yarns in any multiple (folded) or cabled yarns. The weight shall be
taken after any excessive sizing is removed by boiling or other suitable process. Any one of the following formulas can be
used to determine the average yarn number for tariff purposes--
N = BYT/1,000, 100T/Z', BT/Z or ST/10
when:
N is the average yarn number,
B is the breadth (width) of the fabric in centimeters,
Y is the meters (linear) of the fabric per kilogram,
T is the total single yarns per square centimeter,
S is the square meters of fabric per kilogram,
Z is the grams per linear meter of fabric, and
Z' is the grams per square meter of fabric.
Fractions in the resulting "number" shall be disregarded.
(b) Unless the context otherwise requires, provisions relating to one or more weaves embrace only those fabrics which (excluding
selvage) are wholly of the specified weave or weaves, including combinations exclusively thereof.
4. For the purposes of heading 5208 and 5209, the term "certified hand-loomed fabrics" means fabrics made on a hand loom (i.e.,
a nonpower-driven loom) by a cottage industry and which prior to exportation have been certified by an official of a government
agency of the country where the fabrics were produced to have been so made.
Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States Revision 18 (2026)
Annotated for Statistical Reporting Purposes
