HTSUS Chapter 54 — Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, Revision 18 (2026).
Text extracted from the PDF at https://hts.usitc.gov/reststop/file?release=currentRelease&filename=Chapter%2054
(pages 1 only; "=== page N ===" marks the PDF page, addressable as #page=N).

=== page 1 ===
CHAPTER 54
MAN-MADE FILAMENTS; STRIP AND THE LIKE OF MAN-MADE TEXTILE MATERIALS
XI
54-1
Notes
1. Throughout the tariff schedule, the term "man-made fibers" means staple fibers and filaments of organic polymers produced by
manufacturing processes, either:
(a) By polymerization of organic monomers to produce polymers such as polyamides, polyesters, polyolefins or polyurethanes,
or by chemical modification of polymers produced by this process (for example, poly(vinyl alcohol) prepared by the hydrolysis
of poly(vinyl acetate)); or
(b) By dissolution or chemical treatment of natural organic polymers (for example, cellulose) to produce polymers such as
cuprammonium rayon (cupro) or viscose rayon, or by chemical modification of natural organic polymers (for example,
cellulose, casein and other proteins, or alginic acid), to produce polymers such as cellulose acetate or alginates.
The terms "synthetic" and "artificial", used in relation to fibers, mean: synthetic: fibers as defined at (a); artificial: fibers as defined
at (b). Strip and the like of heading 5404 or 5405 are not considered to be man-made fibers.
The terms "man-made", "synthetic" and "artificial" shall have the same meanings when used in relation to "textile materials".
2. Headings 5402 and 5403 do not apply to synthetic or artificial filament tow of chapter 55.
Statistical Notes
1. For the purposes of the woven fabrics of chapter 54:
(a) Unless the context otherwise requires, provisions relating to one or more weaves embrace only those fabrics which (excluding
selvage) are wholly of the specified weave or weaves, including combinations exclusively thereof.
(b) The term "flat fabrics" means fabrics not containing yarns twisted more than 472 turns per meter.
(c) The term "poplin or broadcloth" means plain weave fabrics, not of square construction, whether or not napped, but does not
include the following types:
(i) Fabrics weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, containing 33 or less warp ends and filling picks per square
centimeter; and
(ii) Fabrics weighing more than 170 grams per square meter, of average yarn number 26 or lower number.
(d) The term "sheeting" means plain weave fabrics, whether or not napped, of the following types:
(i) Fabrics weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, of square construction, containing more than 33 warp
ends and filling picks per square centimeter, of average yarn number 68 or lower number, but not including printcloth;
and
(ii) Fabrics weighing more than 170 grams per square meter, but does not include:
(A) Fabrics of which the warp or filling consists of multiple (folded) or cabled yarns, of average yarn number 26 or lower
number; and
(B) Fabrics of average yarn number 27 or higher number, not of square construction.
(e) The term "printcloth" means plain weave fabrics, weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, of average yarn
numbers 43-68, containing more than 33 singles yarns per square centimeter and not containing multiple (folded) or cabled
yarns, of square construction, whether or not napped, of the following types:
(i) Fabrics, not combed; and
(ii) Other fabrics, measuring less than 168 cm in width.
(f) The term "square construction" means fabrics of the following types:
Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States Revision 18 (2026)
Annotated for Statistical Reporting Purposes
