CBP ruling NY N355847 (2025-11-21): The tariff classification of a men’s shirt from Nicaragua
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N355847 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N355847

N355847  
November 21, 2025
  CLA-2-62:OT:RR:NC:N3:356  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6205.20.2047; 9817.00.96
  Lesa King  JCPenney  6501 Legacy Drive, B-100  Plano, TX 75024  RE:  The tariff classification of a men’s shirt from Nicaragua  Dear Ms. King:  In your letter dated November 7, 2025, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your submitted sample  will be retained in our office for training purposes.  Style 334171 is a men’s shirt constructed from 100% cotton, yarn dyed, woven flannel fabric.  The garment  features a button-down collar; a partial front opening with two functional button closures (one on the collar  and the other on the upper placket); five non-functional buttons extending down the front placket; long,  vented sleeves with a hook and loop closure on each cuff and a non-functional button on each cuff and each  vent; a patch pocket on the left chest; a full opening at the center back secured by six hook and loop closures;  and a curved, hemmed bottom.  The applicable subheading for Style 334171 will be 6205.20.2047, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for: Men’s or boys’ shirts: Of cotton: Other: Other: Other: With two or  more colors in the warp and/or the filling: Napped.  The general rate of duty will be 19.7 percent ad valorem.  You also suggest that Style 334171 is eligible for duty-free treatment under the secondary classification of  9817.00.96, HTSUS, which provides, in relevant part, for “articles specially designed or adapted for the use  or benefit of the blind or other physically or mentally handicapped persons.”  Note 4(a) to Chapter 98,  HTSUS, states:  For purposes of subheadings 9817.00.92, 9817.00.94, and 9817.00.96, the term “blind or other  physically or mentally handicapped persons” includes any person suffering form a permanent or  chronic physical or metal impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities.  You state that Style 334171 is “especially made for men who are confined to a wheelchair on a permanent  basis.”  The apparent life activity for which the subject garment is “specially designed” is dressing oneself. 

In Sigvaris, Inc. v. United States, 227 F. Supp 3d 1327, 1336 (Ct. Int’l Trade 2017), aff’d, 899 F.3d 1308  (Fed. Cir. 2018), the U.S. Court of International Trade (CIT) explained that “specially” means “to an extent  greater than in other cases or towards others” and “designed” means something that is “done, performed, or  made with purpose and intent often despite an appearance of being accidental, spontaneous, or natural.”  We  must first evaluate “for whose, if anyone’s, use and benefit is the article specially designed,” and then,  whether “those persons [are] physically handicapped.”  Sigvaris, 899 F.3d at 1314.  The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC) clarified in Sigvaris, 899 F.3d at 1314-15 that to be  “specially designed,” the merchandise “must be intended for the use or benefit of a specific class of persons  to an extent greater than for the use or benefit of others.”  The Court adopted the following five factors,  which U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) uses and weighs against each other on a case-by-case  basis: (1) the physical properties of the article itself (i.e., whether the article is easily distinguishable by  properties of the design, form, and the corresponding use specific to this unique design, from articles useful  to non-handicapped persons); (2) whether any characteristics are present that create a substantial probability  of use by the chronically handicapped so that the article is easily distinguishable from articles useful to the  general public and any use thereof by the general public is so improbable that it would be fugitive; (3)  whether articles are imported by manufacturers or distributors recognized or proven to be involved in this  class or kind of articles for the handicapped; (4) whether the articles are sold in specialty stores which serve  handicapped individuals; and (5) whether the condition of the articles at the time of importation indicates that  these articles are for the handicapped.  With regard to the first and fifth factors listed above, Style 334171 is a flannel shirt.  Such garments do not  normally have a full center back opening.  The presence of such an opening in the subject garment allows a  caregiver to open the garment, assist an individual with placing his arms through the sleeves, and secure the  opening with the hook and loop closures. Garments with full center back openings secured by hook and loop  closures are not typically marketed to or used by the general public.  A full center back opening with hook  and loop closures would be difficult for the wearer to secure; rather, it would require the assistance of another  individual, such as a caregiver, to close the back of the garment for the wearer. Therefore, we find that this  design feature is significant, and that the condition of the garment at time of importation indicates that it is  for use by the handicapped.  With regard to the second factor, you state that Style 334171 will be offered for sale through JCPenney’s  website, on which adaptive garments can be located by entering the word “adaptive” in the “search” field. By  hovering over a garment identified as “adaptive,” the following pop-up appears: “ADAPTIVE Designed with  and for People with Disabilities.”  We also note that “adaptive” is listed as a category under the “men’s” tab  on the website’s home page.  In our opinion, it would be unlikely for a member of the general public, with no  need for assistance in dressing himself, to search for, locate, and choose to purchase the subject shirt, rather  than a similar garment to which adaptive modifications have not been made.    With regard to the third and fourth factors, Style 334171 will be imported and sold by JCPenney, which is not  generally recognized as a distributor of apparel for the chronically disabled.  However, this is but one factor  to consider.  Moreover, while you have not claimed that the subject garment will be sold in specialty stores  that serve handicapped individuals, our research has revealed that similar garments with full back openings  secured by hook and loop closures are available for sale at such stores.  Finally, per U.S. Note 4(b), Subchapter XVII, Chapter 98, HTSUS, subheading 9817.00.96 does not cover  articles for acute or transient disability.  Based on the nature of the subject garment and the expense of  purchasing it, we believe it is unlikely that an individual would invest in it for an acute or transient disability.  For these reasons, and in accordance with Headquarters Ruling Letter H304002, dated June 25, 2019, we find  that Style 334171 is eligible for duty-free treatment under 9817.00.96, HTSUS. 

The tariffs and additional duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided  for your convenience and are subject to change.  The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying  duty rates are provided at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request. This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1). This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect. In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.  Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Maryalice Nowak at maryalice.nowak@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  Deborah Marinucci  Designated Official Performing the Duties of the Division Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

