CBP ruling NY N356781 (2025-12-31): The tariff classification of girls’ upper body garments from Vietnam
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N356781 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N356781

N356781  
December 31, 2025
  CLA-2-62:OT:RR:NC:N1:358  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6206.30.3061
  Jiwon Kwon  CUSAN Customs Service Incorporation  #309, 35, Magokjungang 2-ro, Gangseo-gu  Seoul 07806  South Korea  RE:  The tariff classification of girls’ upper body garments from Vietnam  Dear Ms. Kwon:  In your letter dated December 8, 2025, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Style PID-E73R1G-C126 BG BEACON MH TOP-TPI GAUZE is a girls’ upper body garment constructed of  96% cotton and 4% polyester woven fabric with an inner lining of 60% cotton and 40% polyester woven  fabric. The garment features a round self-fabric elasticized neckline, cap sleeves, five decorative,  non-functional buttons extending vertically from the neckline to the waist, and a pronounced elastic shirring  across the mid-section that transitions into a flare peplum-like lower portion. The garment extends from the  neck to below the waist and will be imported in sizes 4 through 14.  Style PID-R6YM91-C126 BG BEACON MH TOP_TPI is a girls’ upper body garment constructed of 80%  cotton and 20% polyester woven fabric with an inner lining of 100% polyester woven fabric. The garment  features a square neckline, short puff elasticized sleeves and extensive elastic shirring across the bodice that  transitions into a slightly flared lower portion. The garment extends from the neck to below the waist and will  be imported in sizes 4 through 14.  The applicable subheading for both styles will be 6206.30.3061, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for Women’s or girls’ blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses: Of cotton: Other:  Other: Other: Other: Girls’: Other.  The general rate of duty will be 15.4 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/. 

This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and Frequently Asked Questions on  the Trade Remedy/IEEPA page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies/IEEPA-FAQ.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Katherine Souffront at katherine.souffront@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  Evan Conceicao  Designated Official Performing the Duties of the Division Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

