CBP ruling NY N356534 (2025-12-23): The tariff classification of women’s garments from South Korea
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N356534 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N356534

N356534  
December 23, 2025
  CLA-2-62:OT:RR:NC:N3:360  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6106.10.0010; 6204.42.3050
  Taeheon Roh  Hansoll Textile Ltd.  268, Songpa-Daero Seoul  Seoul 05719  South Korea  RE:  The tariff classification of women’s garments from South Korea  Dear Mr. Roh:  In your letter dated December 1, 2025, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your samples will be  retained by this office.  Style 251201A is a women’s blouse constructed from 55% cotton, 41% polyester, and 4% spandex rib knit  fabric.  The fabric measures at least 10 or more stitches per linear centimeter measured in both directions.   The loose-fitting garment extends from the shoulders to below the waist and features a boat neckline, short  sleeves, and a hemmed bottom.   Style 251201B is a women’s dress constructed from both knit and woven components. The upper portion,  extending from the shoulders to the waist, is constructed from 55% cotton, 38% modal, and 7% spandex knit  fabric. The round neckline, cap sleeves, self-fabric belt, and lower portion of the dress, extending from the  waist to the calf area, are constructed from 100% cotton woven fabric.    The dress is constructed from both knit and woven components, and neither the knit fabric nor the woven  fabric imparts the essential character. The dress will be classified in accordance with the General Rules of  Interpretation (GRI) 3(c) under the heading that occurs last in numerical order in the Harmonized Tariff  Schedule of the United States (HTSUS).  The applicable subheading for style 251201A will be 6106.10.0010, HTSUS, which provides for: Women’s  or girls’ blouses and shirts, knitted or crocheted: Of cotton: Women’s. The general rate of duty will be 19.7  percent ad valorem.  The applicable subheading for style 251201B will be 6204.42.3050, HTSUS, which provides for Women’s or  girls’ suits, ensembles, suit-type jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts, divided skirts, trousers, bib and brace 

overalls, breeches and shorts (other than swimwear): Dresses: Of cotton: Other: Other: Other: Other:  Women’s. The duty rate will be 8.4 percent ad valorem.  The tariffs and additional duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided  for your convenience and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying  duty rates are provided at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and Frequently Asked Questions on  the Trade Remedy/IEEPA page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies/IEEPA-FAQ.  At the time of Entry/Entry Summary, you may be requested to verify the information for any specific  shipment or product.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request. This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1). This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect. In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.  Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kimberly Rackett at kimberly.rackett@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  Evan Conceicao  Designated Official Performing the Duties of the Division Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

