CBP ruling NY N357052 (2025-12-29): The tariff classification of women’s trousers from Pakistan
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N357052 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N357052

N357052  
December 29, 2025
  CLA-2-62:OT:RR:NC:N3:360  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6204.62.8018
  Lesa King  Catalyst Brands  6501 Legacy Drive, B100  Plano, TX 75024  RE:  The tariff classification of women’s trousers from Pakistan  Dear Ms. King:  In your letter dated December 15, 2025, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your sample will be  retained by our office.  Style 367912 is a pair of women’s trousers constructed from 98% cotton and 2% spandex woven fabric. The  trousers feature a flat waistband with a front rise that is a bit lower than the back rise, a front fly secured by  four hook and loop closures, five belt loops, two front inset pockets, a coin pocket within the right inset  pocket, two rear patch pockets, and hemmed leg openings.  The applicable subheading for style 367912 will be 6204.62.8018, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for Women’s or girls’ suits, ensembles, suit-type jackets, blazers, dresses,  skirts, divided skirts, trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts (other than swimwear): Trousers,  bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts: Of cotton: Other: Other: Other: Other: Other: Women’s trousers  and breeches: Other. The rate of duty will be 16.6 percent ad valorem.  In your submission, you requested consideration of a secondary classification under 9817.00.96, HTSUS,  which applies to articles and parts of articles specifically designed or adapted for the use or benefit of the  permanently or chronically physically or mentally handicapped.  Subheading 9817.00.96, HTSUS, covers: “Articles specially designed or adapted for the use or benefit of the  blind or other physically or mentally handicapped persons; parts and accessories (except parts and  accessories of braces and artificial limb prosthetics) that are specially designed or adapted for use in the  foregoing articles . . . Other.”  The term “blind or other physically or mentally handicapped persons” includes  “any person suffering from a permanent or chronic physical or mental impairment which substantially limits  one or more major life activities, such as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing,  hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, or working.”  U.S. Note 4(a), Subchapter XVII, Chapter 98, HTSUS.  

Subheading 9817.00.96, HTSUS, excludes “(i) articles for acute or transient disability; (ii) spectacles,  dentures, and cosmetic articles for individuals not substantially disabled; (iii) therapeutic and diagnostic  articles; or, (iv) medicine or drugs.”  U.S. Note 4(b), Subchapter XVII, Chapter 98, HTSUS.  In Sigvaris, Inc. v. United States, 227 F. Supp 3d 1327, 1336 (Ct. Int’l Trade 2017), aff’d, 899 F.3d 1308  (Fed. Cir. 2018), the U.S. Court of International Trade (CIT) explained that “specially” means “to an extent  greater than in other cases or towards others” and “designed” means something that is “done, performed, or  made with purpose and intent often despite an appearance of being accidental, spontaneous, or natural.”  We  must first evaluate “for whose, if anyone’s, use and benefit is the article specially designed,” and then,  whether “those persons [are] physically handicapped [].”  Sigvaris, 899 F.3d at 1314.  The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC) clarified in Sigvaris, 899 F.3d at 1314-15 that to be  “specially designed,” the merchandise “must be intended for the use or benefit of a specific class of persons  to an extent greater than for the use or benefit of others” and adopted the five factors used by U.S. Customs  and Border Protection (CBP):  (1) the physical properties of the article itself (i.e., whether the article is easily distinguishable by properties  of the design, form, and the corresponding use specific to this unique design, from articles useful to  non-handicapped persons); (2) whether any characteristics are present that create a substantial probability of  use by the chronically handicapped so that the article is easily distinguishable from articles useful to the  general public and any use thereof by the general public is so improbable that it would be fugitive; (3)  whether articles are imported by manufacturers or distributors recognized or proven to be involved in this  class or kind of articles for the handicapped; (4) whether the articles are sold in specialty stores which serve  handicapped individuals; and, (5) whether the condition of the articles at the time of importation indicates  that these articles are for the handicapped.  Based upon the sample submitted and the information supplied, it is the opinion of this office that style  367912 is not for the permanently or chronically impaired. The garment’s adaptions are not significant  enough to qualify for classification under 9817.00.96, HTSUS. In addition, the garment is not easily  distinguishable from garments used by the general public, and it does not appear to be designed, marketed,  and sold exclusively for the handicapped community. Therefore, we disagree that a secondary classification  in 9817.00.96, HTSUS, applies.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and Frequently Asked Questions on  the Trade Remedy/IEEPA page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies/IEEPA-FAQ.  At the time of Entry/Entry Summary, you may be requested to verify the information for any specific  shipment or product. 

The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR  177.2. Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to  periodic verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kimberly Rackett at kimberly.rackett@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  Evan Conceicao  Designated Official Performing the Duties of the Division Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

