CBP ruling NY N361049 (2026-05-14): The tariff classification of a women’s sweatshirt from Vietnam
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N361049 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N361049

N361049 May 14, 2026CLA-2-61:OT:RR:NC:CEE004:N3:356
 CATEGORY: Classification
 TARIFF NO.: 6110.20.2046
 Ms. Laura ThelenKohl'sN56 W17000 Ridgewood DriveMenomonee Falls, WI 53051RE:  The tariff classification of a women’s sweatshirt from VietnamDear Ms. Thelen:In your letter dated 
 April 28, 2026
 , you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your submitted sample willbe returned as you requested.Style WX6FA129RD is a women’s constructed from 68 percent cotton and 32 percentupper body garment polyester knit fabric that is napped on its inner surface.tyle significantly   SWX6FA129RD features a partialfront opening that zips through a self-fabric stand-up collar, long sleeves with rib knit cuffs and thumb holes,vertical welt pockets on the front panel below the waist, and a 4 ¼-inch-wide rib knit bottom band thatprovides tightening to the bottom of the garment.The applicable subheading for Style WX6FA129RD will be 6110.20.2046, Harmonized Tariff Schedule ofthe United States (HTSUS), which provides for: Sweaters, pullovers, sweatshirts, waistcoats (vests) andsimilar articles, knitted or crocheted: Of cotton: Other: Other: Sweatshirts: Women’s.  The general rate ofduty will be 16.5 percent ad valorem.The submitted sample is not marked with its fiber content.  Textile fiber products imported into the UnitedStates must be labeled in accordance with the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act (15 U.S.C. 70 through70k) and the rules promulgated thereunder by the Federal Trade Commission.  We suggest you contact theFederal Trade Commission, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20580 for informationconcerning the requirements of this Act.  Information may also be obtained at the Federal Trade Commissionwebsite, www.ftc.gov.The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance. Duty rates are provided for your convenience and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are providedat https://hts.usitc.gov/.
 This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or othercharges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and otherduties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with eitherthe Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisionscovering exceptions to such tariffs.For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated CargoSystems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description asidentified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations(CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of theinformation furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate andcomplete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do notconform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs andBorder Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2. Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodicverification by CBP.This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border ProtectionRegulations (19 C.F.R. 177).A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documentsfiled at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contactNational Import Specialist Maryalice Nowak at maryalice.nowak@cbp.dhs.gov.
 Sincerely,
 (for)James P. ForkanDirectorNational Commodity Specialist Division
 