CBP ruling NY N362269 (2026-07-08): The tariff classification of ornamental craft kits from China.
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N362269 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N362269

N362269  
July 8, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N4:415  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3926.40.0090
  Rebecca Mitchell  Skinnydip, Ltd  Academic House, 24 - 28 Oval Road  London, NW1 7DJ  United Kingdom  RE:      The tariff classification of ornamental craft kits from China.  Dear Ms. Mitchell:  In your letter dated June 12, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Samples were provided and will be retained as requested.  There are four craft kits under consideration with  each being described as a “diamond keychain kit.”  They feature a primary decorative component that the  consumer will embellish with crystal diamonds and then will assemble the other kit elements to create the  finished charm.  The first, item number DS0031003, includes the following components: one decorative acetate plastic piece  with the appearance of a candle, two acrylic plastic pieces, one oval clip, one piece of nylon rope, one small  metal ring, one tube of white glue, four bags of crystal diamonds, and a tool kit.  The second, item number DS0031006, includes the following components: two acetate pieces (one shaped  like a dog), one acrylic plastic piece, one steel wire ring, one tube of white glue, four bags of crystal  diamonds, and a tool kit.  The third, item number DS0031007, includes the following components: one acetate piece shaped like a  croissant, the acrylic plastic pieces, one steel wire ring, one tube of white glue, a bag of crystal diamonds, and  a tool kit.  The fourth, item number DS0042003, includes the following components: one decorative polyurethane  plastic charm, one heart swivel buckle lobster clasp, one piece of nylon rope, six small metal rings, one tube  of white glue, four bags of crystal diamonds, and a tool kit. 

We hold the opinion that these four craft kits would be considered sets for classification purposes and that the  decorative plastic components would impart the essential character to each product, General Rule of  Interpretation 3(b) noted.  The applicable subheading for these four kits, item numbers DS0031003, DS0031006, DS0031007, and  DS0042003, will be 3926.40.0090, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS), which  provides for “[o]ther articles of plastics and articles of other materials of headings 3901 to 3914: [s]tatuettes  and other ornamental articles: [o]ther.”  The column one, general rate of duty is 5.3 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change.  The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the CBP Regulations (19 CFR 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported.  If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kristopher Burton at kristopher.burton@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

