CBP ruling NY N362503 (2026-07-14): The tariff classification of a women’s suit-type jacket from the Philippines
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N362503 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N362503

N362503  
July 14, 2026
  CLA-2-61:OT:RR:NC:N3:356  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6104.33.2000
  Ms. Kristina Rodriguez  J. Crew Group  225 Liberty Street  New York, NY 10281  RE:  The tariff classification of a women’s suit-type jacket from the Philippines  Dear Ms. Rodriguez:  In your letter dated June 23, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your sample will be returned  as you requested.  Style 274224 is a women’s upper body garment constructed from 100 percent polyester knit fabric. It is  constructed from four panels sewn together lengthwise and features a right-over-left, full front opening with  four button closures, which are reinforced with knotted thread and smaller buttons on the garment’s inner  surface; a self-fabric spread collar with curved edges; long, hemmed sleeves; two patch pockets on the front  panels below the waist; a center back seam flanked by two two-inch-long vertical tack stitches that extend  down from the back neckline; and a straight, hemmed bottom.  The body and sleeves are lined with 100  percent polyester woven fabric.  The applicable subheading for Style 274224 will be 6104.33.2000, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for: Women’s and girls’… suit-type jackets, blazers…, knitted or crocheted:  Suit type jackets and blazers: Of synthetic fibers: Other.  The general rate of duty will be 28.2 percent ad  valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the 

classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR  177.2. Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to  periodic verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Maryalice Nowak at maryalice.nowak@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

