CBP ruling NY N363254 (2026-08-06): The tariff classification of a plastic rake from China
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N363254 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N363254

N363254  
August 6, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N4:422  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3924.90.5650
  Barbara Lyons  The Leafinator LLC  11639 Marion Street  Redford, MI 48239  RE:  The tariff classification of a plastic rake from China  Dear Ms. Lyons:  In your letter dated July 11, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling. Photographs were submitted  along with your request.  The item is called the Leafinator. It is a garden rake used in household yards. The item consists of a  polypropylene (PP) upper rake panel, a polypropylene plastic lower scoop panel, an aluminum handle and  aluminum pole, steel fasteners and steel hardware. The item measures approximately 60 inches long.  The Leafinator allows a user to rake, gather, grip, lift, and transport yard debris while staying in a more  upright position, helping to reduce repetitive bending and stooping and easing strain on the back, knees, and  joints.  The item is considered a composite good within the meaning of General Rule of Interpretation (GRI) 3. The  rake consists of polypropylene plastic upper and lower scoop panels, an aluminum handle and pole, steel  fasteners and steel hardware. The polypropylene plastic components constitutes the majority of weight and  bulk of the rake. Also, it performs the principal function of raking and picking up garden debris. Therefore, it  is the opinion of this office that the polypropylene plastic components provides the essential character within  the meaning of GRI 3(b).  The applicable subheading of the Leafinator will be 3924.90.5650, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for “Tableware, kitchenware, other household articles and hygienic or toilet  articles, of plastics: Other: Other. Other.” The general rate of duty will be 3.4 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/. 

This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Dana L. Salas at dana.l.salas@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

