LCD L33788: Manual Wheelchair Bases

=== indication ===
For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit category, 2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable Medicare statutory and regulatory requirements. The purpose of a Local Coverage Determination (LCD) is to provide information regarding “reasonable and necessary” criteria based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions. In addition to the “reasonable and necessary” criteria contained in this LCD there are other payment rules, which are discussed in the following documents, that must also be met prior to Medicare reimbursement: The LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. The LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. For the items addressed in this LCD, the “reasonable and necessary” criteria, based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions, are defined by the following coverage indications, limitations and/or medical necessity. GENERAL COVERAGE CRITERIA A manual wheelchair for use inside the home (E1037, E1038, E1039, E1161, K0001, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0007, K0008, K0009) is covered if: Criteria A, B, C, D, and E are met; and Criterion F or G is met. The beneficiary has a mobility limitation that significantly impairs his/her ability to participate in one or more mobility-related activities of daily living (MRADLs) such as toileting, feeding, dressing, grooming, and bathing in customary locations in the home. A mobility limitation is one that: 1. Prevents the beneficiary from accomplishing an MRADL entirely, or 2. Places the beneficiary at reasonably determined heightened risk of morbidity or mortality secondary to the attempts to perform an MRADL; or 3. Prevents the beneficiary from completing an MRADL within a reasonable time frame. The beneficiary’s mobility limitation cannot be sufficiently resolved by the use of an appropriately fitted cane or walker. The beneficiary’s home provides adequate access between rooms, maneuvering space, and surfaces for use of the manual wheelchair that is provided. Use of a manual wheelchair will significantly improve the beneficiary’s ability to participate in MRADLs and the beneficiary will use it on a regular basis in the home. The beneficiary has not expressed an unwillingness to use the manual wheelchair that is provided in the home. The beneficiary has sufficient upper extremity function and other physical and mental capabilities needed to safely self-propel the manual wheelchair that is provided in the home during a typical day. Limitations of strength, endurance, range of motion, or coordination, presence of pain, or deformity or absence of one or both upper extremities are relevant to the assessment of upper extremity function. The beneficiary has a caregiver who is available, willing, and able to provide assistance with the wheelchair. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR SPECIFIC MANUAL WHEELCHAIRS (E1037, E1038, E1039, E1161, K0002, K0003, K0004, K0005, K0006, K0007, K0008) In addition to the general manual wheelchair criteria above, the specific criteria below must be met for each manual wheelchair. If the specific criteria are not met, the manual wheelchair will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. A transport chair (E1037, E1038 or E1039) is covered as an alternative to a standard manual wheelchair (K0001) and if basic coverage criteria A-E and G above are met. A standard hemi-wheelchair (K0002) is covered when the beneficiary requires a lower seat height (17" to 18") because of short stature or to enable the beneficiary to place his/her feet on the ground for propulsion. A lightweight wheelchair (K0003) is covered when a beneficiary meets both criteria (1) and (2): Cannot self-propel in a standard wheelchair in the home; and The beneficiary can and does self-propel in a lightweight wheelchair. A high strength lightweight wheelchair (K0004) is covered when a beneficiary meets the criteria in (1) or (2): The beneficiary self-propels the wheelchair while engaging in frequent activities in the home that cannot be performed in a standard or lightweight wheelchair. The beneficiary requires a seat width, depth, or height that cannot be accommodated in a standard, lightweight or hemi-wheelchair, and spends at least two hours per day in the wheelchair. A high strength lightweight wheelchair is rarely reasonable and necessary if the expected duration of need is less than three months (e.g., post-operative recovery). An ultra lightweight manual wheelchair (K0005) is covered for a beneficiary if criteria (1) or (2) is met and (3) and (4) are met: The beneficiary must be a full-time manual wheelchair user. The beneficiary must require individualized fitting and adjustments for one or more features such as, but not limited to, axle configuration, wheel camber, or seat and back angles, and which cannot be accommodated by a K0001 through K0004 manual wheelchair. The beneficiary must have a specialty evaluation that was performed by a licensed/certified medical professional (LCMP), such as a PT or OT, or physician who has specific training and experience in rehabilitation wheelchair evaluations and that documents the medical necessity for the wheelchair and its special features (see Documentation Requirements section). The LCMP may have no financial relationship with the supplier. The wheelchair is provided by a Rehabilitative Technology Supplier (RTS) that employs a RESNA-certified Assistive Technology Professional (ATP) who specializes in wheelchairs and who has direct, in-person involvement in the wheelchair selection for the patient. A heavy duty wheelchair (K0006) is covered if the beneficiary weighs more than 250 pounds or the beneficiary has severe spasticity. An extra heavy duty wheelchair (K0007) is covered if the beneficiary weighs more than 300 pounds. A manual wheelchair with tilt in space (E1161) is covered if the beneficiary meets the general coverage criteria for a manual wheelchair above, and if criteria (1) and (2) are met: The beneficiary must have a specialty evaluation that was performed by a licensed/certified medical professional (LCMP), such as a PT or OT, or physician who has specific training and experience in rehabilitation wheelchair evaluations and that documents the medical necessity for the wheelchair and its special features (see Documentation Requirements section). The LCMP may have no financial relationship with the supplier. The wheelchair is provided by a Rehabilitative Technology Supplier (RTS) that employs a RESNA-certified Assistive Technology Professional (ATP) who specializes in wheelchairs and who has direct, in-person involvement in the wheelchair selection for the patient. A custom manual wheelchair base (K0008) is covered if, in addition to the general coverage criteria above, the specific configuration required to address the beneficiary’s physical and/or functional deficits cannot be met using one of the standard manual wheelchair bases plus an appropriate combination of wheelchair seating systems, cushions, options or accessories (prefabricated or custom fabricated), such that the individual construction of a unique individual manual wheelchair base is required. If K0008 is used to describe a prefabricated manual wheelchair base, even one that has been modified in any fashion, the claim will be denied for incorrect coding. Refer to the CODING GUIDELINES section of the related Policy Article for additional information about correct coding of K0008. A custom manual wheelchair is not reasonable and necessary if the expected duration of need is less than three months (e.g., post-operative recovery). If the manual wheelchair will be used inside the home and the coverage criteria are not met, it will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. If the manual wheelchair will only be used outside the home, see NON-MEDICAL NECESSITY COVERAGE AND PAYMENT RULES section of the related Policy Article for information concerning statutory coverage requirements. If the manual wheelchair base is not covered, then related accessories will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. MISCELLANEOUS Payment is made for only one wheelchair at a time. Backup chairs are denied as not reasonable and necessary. One month's rental for a standard manual wheelchair (K0001) is covered if a beneficiary-owned wheelchair is being repaired. GENERAL A Standard Written Order (SWO) must be communicated to the supplier before a claim is submitted. If the supplier bills for an item addressed in this policy without first receiving a completed SWO, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. For Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) base items that require a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD), the supplier must have received a signed SWO before the DMEPOS item is delivered to a beneficiary. If a supplier delivers a DMEPOS item without first receiving a WOPD, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Refer to the LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. For DMEPOS base items that require a WOPD, and also require separately billed associated options, accessories, and/or supplies, the supplier must have received a WOPD which lists the base item and which may list all the associated options, accessories, and/or supplies that are separately billed prior to the delivery of the items. In this scenario, if the supplier separately bills for associated options, accessories, and/or supplies without first receiving a completed and signed WOPD of the base item prior to delivery, the claim(s) shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. An item/service is correctly coded when it meets all the coding guidelines listed in CMS HCPCS guidelines, LCDs, LCD-related Policy Articles, or DME MAC articles. Claims that do not meet coding guidelines shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary/incorrectly coded. Proof of delivery (POD) is a Supplier Standard and DMEPOS suppliers are required to maintain POD documentation in their files. Proof of delivery documentation must be made available to the Medicare contractor upon request. All services that do not have appropriate proof of delivery from the supplier shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary.

=== associated_info ===
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Section 1833(e) of the Social Security Act precludes payment to any provider of services unless "there has been furnished such information as may be necessary in order to determine the amounts due such provider." It is expected that the beneficiary's medical records will reflect the need for the care provided. The beneficiary's medical records include the treating practitioner's office records, hospital records, nursing home records, home health agency records, records from other healthcare professionals and test reports. This documentation must be available upon request. GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS In order to justify payment for DMEPOS items, suppliers must meet the following requirements: SWO Medical Record Information (including continued need/use if applicable) Correct Coding Proof of Delivery Refer to the LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information regarding these requirements. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Items covered in this LCD have additional policy-specific requirements that must be met prior to Medicare reimbursement. Refer to the LCD-related Policy article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information. Miscellaneous Appendices Utilization Guidelines Refer to Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity

=== summary_of_evidence ===
N/A

=== analysis_of_evidence ===
N/A

=== bibliography ===
N/A
