LCD L33796: Osteogenesis Stimulators

=== indication ===
For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit category, 2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable Medicare statutory and regulatory requirements. The purpose of a Local Coverage Determination (LCD) is to provide information regarding “reasonable and necessary” criteria based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions. In addition to the “reasonable and necessary” criteria contained in this LCD there are other payment rules, which are discussed in the following documents, that must also be met prior to Medicare reimbursement: The LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. The LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. For the items addressed in this LCD, the “reasonable and necessary” criteria, based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions, are defined by the following coverage indications, limitations and/or medical necessity. A non-spinal electrical osteogenesis stimulator (E0747) is covered only if any of the following criteria are met: Nonunion of a long bone fracture (see Appendices section) defined as radiographic evidence that fracture healing has ceased for three or more months prior to starting treatment with the osteogenesis stimulator, or Failed fusion of a joint other than in the spine where a minimum of nine months has elapsed since the last surgery, or Congenital pseudarthrosis. Nonunion of a long bone fracture must be documented by a minimum of two sets of radiographs obtained prior to starting treatment with the osteogenesis stimulator, separated by a minimum of 90 days, each including multiple views of the fracture site, and with a written interpretation by a treating practitioner stating that there has been no clinically significant evidence of fracture healing between the two sets of radiographs. A non-spinal electrical osteogenesis stimulator will be denied as not medically necessary if none of the criteria above are met. A spinal electrical osteogenesis stimulator (E0748) is covered only if any of the following criteria are met: Failed spinal fusion where a minimum of nine months has elapsed since the last surgery, or Following a multilevel spinal fusion surgery (see Appendices section), or Following spinal fusion surgery where there is a history of a previously failed spinal fusion at the same site. A spinal electrical osteogenesis stimulator will be denied as not medically necessary if none of the criteria above are met. An ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator (E0760) is covered only if all of the following criteria are met: Nonunion of a fracture documented by a minimum of two sets of radiographs obtained prior to starting treatment with the osteogenesis stimulator, separated by a minimum of 90 days. Each radiograph set must include multiple views of the fracture site accompanied by a written interpretation by a treating practitioner stating that there has been no clinically significant evidence of fracture healing between the two sets of radiographs; and The fracture is not of the skull or vertebrae; and The fracture is not tumor related. An ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator will be denied as not medically necessary if any of the criteria above are not met. Use of an ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator for the treatment of a fresh fracture or delayed union will be denied as not medically necessary. Ultrasound conductive coupling gel is covered and separately payable if an ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator is covered. An ultrasonic osteogenesis stimulator will be denied as not medically necessary if it is used with other noninvasive osteogenesis stimulators. GENERAL A Standard Written Order (SWO) must be communicated to the supplier before a claim is submitted. If the supplier bills for an item addressed in this policy without first receiving a completed SWO, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. For Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) base items that require a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD), the supplier must have received a signed SWO before the DMEPOS item is delivered to a beneficiary. If a supplier delivers a DMEPOS item without first receiving a WOPD, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Refer to the LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. For DMEPOS base items that require a WOPD, and also require separately billed associated options, accessories, and/or supplies, the supplier must have received a WOPD which lists the base item and which may list all the associated options, accessories, and/or supplies that are separately billed prior to the delivery of the items. In this scenario, if the supplier separately bills for associated options, accessories, and/or supplies without first receiving a completed and signed WOPD of the base item prior to delivery, the claim(s) shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. An item/service is correctly coded when it meets all the coding guidelines listed in CMS HCPCS guidelines, LCDs, LCD-related Policy Articles, or DME MAC articles. Claims that do not meet coding guidelines shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary/incorrectly coded. Proof of delivery (POD) is a Supplier Standard and DMEPOS suppliers are required to maintain POD documentation in their files. Proof of delivery documentation must be made available to the Medicare contractor upon request. All services that do not have appropriate proof of delivery from the supplier shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. REFILL REQUIREMENTS For DMEPOS items and supplies provided on a recurring basis, billing must be based on prospective, not retrospective use. For DMEPOS products that are supplied as refills to the original order, suppliers must contact the beneficiary, and document an affirmative response, prior to dispensing the refill and not automatically ship on a pre-determined basis, even if authorized by the beneficiary. This shall be done to ensure that the refilled item remains reasonable and necessary, existing supplies are expected to end, and to confirm any changes or modifications to the order. Contact with the beneficiary or designee regarding refills must take place no sooner than 30 calendar days prior to the expected end of the current supply. For delivery of refills, the supplier must deliver the DMEPOS product no sooner than 10 calendar days prior to the expected end of the current supply. This is regardless of which delivery method is utilized. For all DMEPOS items that are provided on a recurring basis, suppliers are required to have contact with the beneficiary or caregiver/designee and document an affirmative response, prior to dispensing a new supply of items. Suppliers must not deliver refills without a refill request and an affirmative response from a beneficiary. Items delivered without a valid, documented refill request will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Suppliers must not dispense a quantity of supplies exceeding a beneficiary's expected utilization. Suppliers must stay attuned to changed or atypical utilization patterns on the part of their clients. Suppliers must verify with the treating practitioners that any changed or atypical utilization is warranted. Regardless of utilization, a supplier must not dispense more than a three (3)-month quantity at a time.

=== associated_info ===
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Section 1833(e) of the Social Security Act precludes payment to any provider of services unless "there has been furnished such information as may be necessary in order to determine the amounts due such provider.” It is expected that the beneficiary's medical records will reflect the need for the care provided. The beneficiary's medical records include the treating practitioner's office records, hospital records, nursing home records, home health agency records, records from other healthcare professionals and test reports. This documentation must be available upon request. GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS In order to justify payment for DMEPOS items, suppliers must meet the following requirements: SWO Medical Record Information (including continued need/use if applicable) Correct Coding Proof of Delivery Refer to the LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information regarding these requirements. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Items covered in this LCD have additional policy-specific requirements that must be met prior to Medicare reimbursement. Refer to the LCD-related Policy article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information. MISCELLANEOUS APPENDICES A multilevel spinal fusion is one which involves 3 or more vertebrae (e.g., L3-L5, L4-S1, etc). A long bone is limited to a clavicle, humerus, radius, ulna, femur, tibia, fibula, metacarpal, or metatarsal. UTILIZATION GUIDELINES Refer to Coverage Indications, Limitations and/or Medical Necessity

=== summary_of_evidence ===
Per the 2022 Medicare Fee-for Service Supplemental Improper Payment Data, the overall CERT error rate for DMEPOS claims is 25.2%. Claims for items which have recently had Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMNs) or Durable Medical Equipment Information Forms (DIFs) eliminated represent an area of potential vulnerability that may increase the CERT error rate.

=== analysis_of_evidence ===
As outlined in the CMS Program Integrity Manual (Pub. 100-08) Chapter 1, Section 1.3.8, the DME MACs are responsible for reducing the payment error rate by preventing initial payment of claims that do not comply with Medicare’s coverage, coding, payment, and billing policies. The DME MACs are continually looking to identify any potential vulnerabilities that may increase the CERT error rate and have recognized that claims for items which have recently had the CMNs or DIFs eliminated may represent one such vulnerability. Therefore, the DME MACs are proposing the addition of the KX, GA and GZ modifiers to properly indicate when claims for osteogenesis stimulators are reasonable and necessary.

=== bibliography ===
NA
