CBP ruling NY N356893 (2025-12-29): The tariff classification of girls’ tops from Vietnam
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N356893 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N356893

N356893  
December 29, 2025
  CLA-2-61:OT:RR:NC:N1:358  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6109.90.1070
  Richard Recupero  Lt Apparel Group  101 Crawfords Corner Road, Suite 2402  Holmdel, NJ 07733  RE:  The tariff classification of girls’ tops from Vietnam  Dear Mr. Recupero:  In your letter dated December 10, 2025, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Style SS27GAA0015 is a girls’ sleeveless tank top, composed of 95% polyester, 5% elastane jersey knit  fabric. The garment features narrow spaghetti shoulder straps, a scooped front and back neckline and a  sewn-in supportive bra constructed of 89% polyester and 11% elastane internal mesh knit fabric that fits  snugly and provides light support around the bust. The garment extends from the shoulders to below the  waist.  Style SS27GAA0016 is a girls’ sleeveless tank top, composed of 89% polyester and 11% elastane knit fabric.  The close-fitting garment features shoulder straps measuring approximately 1 ¼ inches, decorative ruffle trim  around the arm openings down to the waist, and a sewn-in supportive bra constructed of the same fabric as  the garment incorporated at the neckline. The garment extends from the shoulders to below the waist.  In your submission you suggest classification under 6212.10.9020, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United  States (HTSUS), which provides for Brassieres…whether or not knitted or crocheted: Brassieres: Other:  Other: Of man-made fibers. However, both garments lack the structural features required for classification as  a supportive garment and are designed and marketed as outer tank tops.  Consequently, the applicable subheading for styles SS27GAA0015 and SS27GAA0016 will be  6109.90.1070, HTSUS, which provides for “T-shirts, singlets, tank tops and similar garments, knitted or  crocheted:  Of other textile materials:  Of man-made fibers:  Women’s or girls’:  Tank tops and singlets:    Girls’.”  The general rate of duty will be 32 percent ad valorem. 

The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and Frequently Asked Questions on  the Trade Remedy/IEEPA page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies/IEEPA-FAQ.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Katherine Souffront at katherine.souffront@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  Evan Conceicao  Designated Official Performing the Duties of the Division Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

