CBP ruling NY N360338 (2026-04-24): The tariff classification of a women’s upper body garment from China
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N360338 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N360338

N360338  
April 24, 2026
  CLA-2-61:OT:RR:NC:N3:356  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6110.20.2079
  Ms. Miesha Bacon  Johnny Was LLC  712 South Olive Street  Los Angeles, CA 90014  RE:  The tariff classification of a women’s upper body garment from China  Dear Ms. Bacon:  In your letter dated April 2, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your submitted sample will be  returned as you requested.  Style A2726-4 “Bee Active Drop Shoulder Bomber Jacket – Valley of the Fleurs” is a women’s upper body  garment constructed from knit fabric.  While the fiber content of the submitted sample is 85 percent polyester  and 15 percent rayon, you state that the garment, as imported, will have a fiber content of 96 percent cotton  and 4 percent spandex.  The fabric of the garment’s outer surface measures more than nine stitches per two  centimeters in the direction the stitches were formed.  Style A2726-4 features a full-front opening with a  zippered closure, a rib knit band collar, long sleeves with rib knit cuffs, vertical pockets with zippered  closures on the front panels below the waist, and a rib knit bottom band that does not provide tightening to  the bottom of the garment.  It is lined with 92 percent polyester and 8 percent spandex woven fabric.  Although you describe Style A2726-4 as a “bomber style jacket,” the sample garment lacks the character of  an outerwear jacket.  Its styling, cut, and features do not support a finding that this item is an outerwear  jacket designed for wear over all other clothing for protection against the weather.  The applicable subheading for Style A2726-4 will be 6110.20.2079, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the  United States (HTSUS), which provides for: Sweaters, pullovers, sweatshirts, waistcoats (vests) and similar  articles, knitted or crocheted: Of cotton: Other: Other: Other: Women’s or girls’: Other.  The general rate of  duty will be 16.5 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/. 

This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR  177.2. Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to  periodic verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Maryalice Nowak at maryalice.nowak@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

