CBP ruling NY N362836 (2026-07-21): The tariff classification of a plastic cartridge from China.
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N362836 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N362836

N362836  
July 21, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N4:415  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3926.90.2100
  Jake Swickle  CurifyLabs, Inc.  13475 Atlantic Boulevard, Unit 8, Suite 888  Jacksonville, FL 32225  RE:      The tariff classification of a plastic cartridge from China.  Dear Mr. Swickle:  In your letter dated July 2, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Images were provided in lieu of a sample.  The product under consideration is described as a molded plastic cartridge.  It consists of two parts, a hollow  cylindrical barrel with a capacity of 100 milliliters and a fitted plunger that slides within the barrel.  The  barrel is made of plastic, and the plunger is made of plastic with a rubber tip.  It will be used as a material  reservoir and dispensing cartridge in an additive-manufacturing (3D printing) system that produces objects by  semi-solid extrusion.  In operation, the cartridge is filled with a printing paste and mounted in the printer,  where a mechanical drive advances the plunger to extrude the paste through the barrel opening in controlled  amounts.  You indicate it has no needle, no needle mount, and while it is sterilized, it is not for medical use.   We note that this “cartridge” is a graduated syringe.  In your request, you state that you believe this product is properly classified under subheading 3926.90.9989,  Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS), as an other article of plastic.  We disagree and  refer to New York ruling letter N339867, dated May 15, 2024, which addressed a similar plastic syringe used  to mix paint with caulk and then apply it around windows.  The applicable subheading for this plastic cartridge will be 3926.90.2100, HTSUS, which provides for  “[o]ther articles of plastics and articles of other materials of headings 3901 to 3914: [o]ther: [i]ce bags;  douche bags, enema bags, hot water bottles, and fittings therefor; invalid and similar nursing cushions; dress  shields; pessaries; prophylactics; bulbs for syringes; syringes (other than hypodermic syringes) and fittings  therefor, not in part of glass or metal.”  The column one, general rate of duty is 4.2 percent ad valorem. 

The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change.  The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the CBP Regulations (19 CFR 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported.  If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kristopher Burton at kristopher.burton@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

