CBP ruling NY N362589 (2026-07-10): The tariff classification of a men’s jacket from Vietnam
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N362589 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N362589

N362589  
July 10, 2026
  CLA-2-62:OT:RR:NC:N3:348  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6201.40.7511
  Casey Wehner  Adidas  6650 N Basin Ave, Dock 23  Portland, OR 97217  RE:  The tariff classification of a men’s jacket from Vietnam  Dear Ms. Wehner:  In your letter dated June 25, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your sample will be returned  as requested.  Style LD-4330 is a men’s jacket constructed from both knit and woven components. The hood, sleeves, back  yoke, and the shoulders, are constructed from 100% polyamide woven fabric. The balance of the garment is  constructed from 82% polyester, and 18% elastane knit fabric.  The hood and sleeves are removable and  attached at the shoulders by means of zipper closures.  The garment features a hood, full frontal opening  secured with zipper closures, round neckline, long sleeves with thumb holes and an elasticized binding tape  at the cuffs, pockets below the waist secured by zipper closures, and the garment bottom is bound with an  elasticized binding tape.  Neither the knit fabric nor the woven fabric exceeds 60% of the garment’s visible surface area. Moreover,  neither fabric imparts the essential character of the garment. Therefore, style LD-4330 will be classified in  accordance with the General Rules of Interpretation (GRIs), specifically 3(c), under the heading that occurs  last in numerical order in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS).  The applicable subheading for style LD-4330 will be 6201.40.7511, HTSUS provides for Men’s or boys’  overcoats, carcoats, capes, cloaks, anoraks (including ski-jackets), windbreakers and similar articles  (including padded, sleeveless jackets), other than those of heading 6203: Of man-made fibers: Anoraks  (including ski-jackets), windbreakers and similar articles (including padded, sleeveless jackets): Other: Other:  Other: Other: Other: Men’s.  The general rate of duty will be 27.7 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/. 

This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Rosemarie Hayward at rosemariecasey.hayward@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

