CBP ruling NY N362700 (2026-07-20): The tariff classification of men’s upper body garments from Jordan
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N362700 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N362700

N362700  
July 20, 2026
  CLA-2-61:OT:RR:NC:N3:356  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 6105.20.2010; 6110.30.3053
  Mr. Richard Recupero  LT Uniforms LLC  101 Crawfords Corner Road  Holmdel, NJ 07733-1900  RE:  The tariff classification of men’s upper body garments from Jordan  Dear Mr. Recupero:  In your letter dated June 29, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Your submitted samples will  be returned as requested.  Style 1025AD, submitted in a men’s size medium, is a men’s upper body garment constructed from 92  percent polyester and 8 percent spandex knit fabric that is lightly brushed on its inner surface.  The outer  surface of the garment’s fabric measures more than 10 stitches per linear centimeter in both the horizontal  and vertical directions.  Style 1025AD features a partial front opening with a zippered closure that zips  through a self-fabric stand-up collar; a zipper garage at the top of the collar; long sleeves with self-fabric  capping at the ends; and a straight, hemmed bottom.  Style 1000AD, submitted in a men’s size medium, is a men’s cut and sewn upper body garment constructed  from 100 percent polyester knit fabric that is lightly brushed on its inner and outer surfaces.  The outer  surface of the garment’s fabric measures more than nine stitches per two centimeters in the direction the  stitches were formed.  Style 1000AD features a partial front opening with a zippered closure that zips through  a self-fabric stand-up collar; long, hemmed sleeves; side seam pockets below the waist; and a straight,  hemmed bottom.  You ask whether Style 1025AD is classifiable under heading 6101, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the  United States (HTSUS), which provides, inter alia, for men’s or boys’ knitted anoraks, windbreakers, and  similar articles.  However, the garment lacks the character of an outerwear jacket.  The styling, cut, and  features do not support a finding that this item is an outerwear jacket designed for wear over all other  clothing for protection against the elements.  Additionally, you state that the side seam pockets of Style 1000AD are not below the waist, but at the waist.    However, we placed the sample garment on an appropriate size mannequin and found that a portion of each 

of these pockets is below the waist.  Per Headquarters Ruling Letter H293112, dated April 26, 2018, if any  part of a pocket is below the waist, it is considered a pocket below the waist.    The applicable subheading for Style 1025AD will be 6105.20.2010, HTSUS, which provides for: Men’s or  boys’ shirts, knitted or crocheted: Of man-made fibers: Other: Men’s.  The general rate of duty will be 32  percent ad valorem.  The applicable subheading for Style 1000AD will be 6110.30.3053, HTSUS, which provides for: Sweaters,  pullovers, sweatshirts, waistcoats (vests) and similar articles, knitted or crocheted: Of man-made fibers:  Other: Other: Other: Other: Other: Men’s or boys’: Other.  The general rate of duty will be 32 percent ad  valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR  177.2. Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to  periodic verification by CBP. 

This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Maryalice Nowak at maryalice.nowak@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

