CBP ruling NY N363173 (2026-07-31): The tariff classification of collectible miniature studio equipment from Belgium.
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N363173 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N363173

N363173  
July 31, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N4:415  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3926.40.0090
  Ryo Inagaki  Quick It, SRL  Rue Cervantes 6, Box 30  Brussels, 1190  Belgium  RE:      The tariff classification of collectible miniature studio equipment from Belgium.  Dear Mr. Inagaki:  In your letter dated July 10, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Images were provided in lieu of samples.  The products under consideration are all described as highly detailed, non-functional miniature replicas (at  1/6th scale) of historical electronic recording studio equipment, such as synthesizers and rack-mounted  digital samplers.  Your submission indicates they are entirely static display pieces and that they contain no  electronic components, produce no sound, and possess no moving parts (all knobs, keys, and faders are  rigidly fixed to the chassis).  These articles are intended to serve as collectible decorations, specifically for  creating miniature studio dioramas.  They will be made using fused deposition modeling (FDM) 3D printing  using polylactic acid (PLA) plastic.  The applicable subheading for these decorative studio equipment replicas will be 3926.40.0090, Harmonized  Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS), which provides for “[o]ther articles of plastics and articles of  other materials of headings 3901 to 3914: [s]tatuettes and other ornamental articles: [o]ther.”  The column  one, general rate of duty is 5.3 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change.  The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the 

classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the CBP Regulations (19 CFR 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported.  If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kristopher Burton at kristopher.burton@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

