CBP ruling NY N363522 (2026-08-07): The tariff classification of four cellphone cases from Canada.
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N363522 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N363522

N363522  
August 7, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N4:415  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3926.90.9989
  Aleksandar Todorovic  MeeMojo, Inc.  5700 McAdam Road  Mississauga, ON L4Z 1T2  Canada  RE:      The tariff classification of four cellphone cases from Canada.  Dear Mr. Todorovic:  In your letter dated July 22, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Images were provided in lieu of samples.   There are four products under consideration, and they are all described as a two-part fitted protective case for  the iPhone 17 Pro / 17 Pro Max.  Each consists of a black G10 (fiberglass-reinforced epoxy) plastic  composite rear housing and a machined front bezel, with the bezel material defining the four styles.  The first  style has a G10 plastic composite front bezel, the second style has an aluminum bezel, the third style has a  stainless-steel bezel, and the fourth style has a titanium front bezel.  All versions will have an internal plastic  polymer impact liner, stainless-steel fasteners, and a neodymium (N52) magnet array for passive  MagSafe-compatible attachment.  You indicate that the metal components will not come in contact with the  phone.  In your submission, you indicate that these cases are classifiable under heading 4202.  We disagree.  We refer  to Headquarters ruling letter H297451, dated November 3, 2020, which details why these cellphone cases are  not classified under heading 4202 but rather by their constituent materials.  We hold the opinion that it is the  plastic that would impart the essential character to each case as it provides the impact protection and  predominates over the various metal bezel materials, General Rule of Interpretation 3(b) noted.  As these four cellphone cases would be considered articles of plastic, and as they are not more specifically  provided for elsewhere, the applicable subheading will be 3926.90.9989, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the  United States (HTSUS), which provides for “[o]ther articles of plastics and articles of other materials of  headings 3901 to 3914: [o]ther: [o]ther: [o]ther.”  The column one, general rate of duty is 5.3 percent ad  valorem. 

The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change.  The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the  classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at  https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the CBP Regulations (19 CFR 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported.  If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Kristopher Burton at kristopher.burton@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

