CBP ruling NY N363845 (2026-08-05): The tariff classification of polyethylene glycol powder from Switzerland
https://rulings.cbp.gov/ruling/N363845 — text as served by https://rulings.cbp.gov/api/ruling/N363845

N363845  
August 5, 2026
  CLA-2-39:OT:RR:NC:N5:137  
CATEGORY: Classification  
TARIFF NO.: 3907.29.0000
  Fred Ahari  Biopsy Sciences, LLC  4900 Creekside Drive, Suite C  Clearwater, FL 33760  RE:  The tariff classification of polyethylene glycol powder from Switzerland  Dear Mr. Ahari:  In your letter dated July 8, 2026, you requested a tariff classification ruling.  Product Code PM-01-002 is referred to as a hydrogel polymer. It is composed of 98.3 percent polyethylene  glycol, 1.4 percent trimethylene carbonate and 0.3 percent acrylate. The product will be imported in bulk  powder form. It will be further processed after importation into a solution used in the manufacture of  implantable products.  Chapter 39 Note 4 defines “copolymers” as “all polymers in which no single monomer contributes 95 percent  or more by weight to the total polymer content.” As the hydrogel polymer is composed of 98.3 percent  polyethylene glycol, it is not a “copolymer” according to Note 4 and is considered to be polyethylene glycol  for tariff purposes.  The applicable subheading for the polyethylene glycol powder will be 3907.29.0000, Harmonized Tariff  Schedule of the United States (HTSUS), which provides for polyacetals, other polyethers and epoxide resins,  in primary forms: other polyethers: other. The general rate of duty will be 6.5 percent ad valorem.  The duties cited above are current as of this ruling’s issuance.  Duty rates are provided for your convenience  and are subject to change. The text of the most recent HTSUS and the accompanying duty rates are provided  at https://hts.usitc.gov/.  This ruling does not address the applicability of any additional duties, taxes, fees, exactions and/or other  charges, which may apply to the goods discussed herein.  This includes, but is not limited to, tariffs and other  duties as provided for in Subchapter III to Chapter 99, HTSUS.  Thus, for example, in addition to the 

classification stated above, the merchandise covered by this ruling may also need to be reported with either  the Chapter 99 provision under which an additional tariff applies or one of the Chapter 99 provisions  covering exceptions to such tariffs.  For further information to assist with the importation process, please refer to the frequently updated Cargo  Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) messages at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/automated/cargo-systems-messaging-service and the Trade Remedies page at   https://www.cbp.gov/trade/programs-administration/trade-remedies.  The holding set forth above applies only to the specific factual situation and merchandise description as  identified in the ruling request.  This position is clearly set forth in Title 19, Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR), Section 177.9(b)(1).  This section states that a ruling letter is issued on the assumption that all of the  information furnished in the ruling letter, whether directly, by reference, or by implication, is accurate and  complete in every material respect.  In the event that the facts are modified in any way, or if the goods do not  conform to these facts at time of importation, you should bring this to the attention of U.S. Customs and  Border Protection (CBP) and submit a request for a new ruling in accordance with 19 CFR 177.2.   Additionally, we note that the material facts described in the foregoing ruling may be subject to periodic  verification by CBP.  This ruling is being issued under the provisions of Part 177 of the Customs and Border Protection  Regulations (19 C.F.R. 177).  A copy of the ruling or the control number indicated above should be provided with the entry documents  filed at the time this merchandise is imported. If you have any questions regarding the ruling, please contact  National Import Specialist Christina Allen at julie.c.allen@cbp.dhs.gov.  
Sincerely,
  (for)  James P. Forkan  Director  National Commodity Specialist Division 

