HTSUS Chapter 55 — Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, Revision 18 (2026).
Text extracted from the PDF at https://hts.usitc.gov/reststop/file?release=currentRelease&filename=Chapter%2055
(pages 1 only; "=== page N ===" marks the PDF page, addressable as #page=N).

=== page 1 ===
CHAPTER 55
MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBERS
XI
55-1
Note
1. Headings 5501 and 5502 apply only to man-made filament tow, consisting of parallel filaments of a uniform length equal to the
length of the tow, meeting the following specifications:
(a) Length of tow exceeding 2 m;
(b) Twist less than 5 turns per meter;
(c) Measuring per filament less than 67 decitex;
(d) Synthetic filament tow only: the tow must be drawn, that is to say, be incapable of being stretched by more than 100 percent
of its length; and
(e) Total measurement of tow more than 20,000 decitex.
Tow of a length not exceeding 2 m is to be classified in heading 5503 or 5504.
Additional U.S. Note
1. For the purposes of the woven fabrics of chapter 55, unless the context otherwise requires, provisions relating to one or more
weaves embrace only those fabrics which (excluding selvage) are wholly of the specified weave or weaves, including combinations
exclusively thereof.
Statistical Notes
1. For the purposes of the woven fabrics of chapter 55:
(a) The term "poplin or broadcloth" means plain weave fabrics, not of square construction, whether or not napped, but does not
include the following types:
(i) Fabrics weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, containing 33 or less warp ends and filling picks per square
centimeter; and
(ii) Fabrics weighing more than 170 grams per square meter, of average yarn number 26 or lower number.
(b) The term "sheeting" means plain weave fabrics, whether or not napped, of the following types:
(i) Fabrics weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, of square construction, containing more than 33 warp
ends and filling picks per square centimeter, of average yarn number 68 or lower number, but not including printcloth;
and
(ii) Fabrics weighing more than 170 grams per square meter, but does not include:
(A) Fabrics of which the warp or filling consists of multiple (folded) or cabled yarns, of average yarn number 26 or lower
number; and
(B) Fabrics of average yarn number 27 or higher number, not of square construction.
(c) The term "printcloth" means plain weave fabrics, weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, of average yarn
numbers 43-68, containing more than 33 singles yarns per square centimeter and not containing multiple (folded) or cabled
yarns, of square construction, whether or not napped, of the following types:
(i) Fabrics, not combed; and
(ii) Other fabrics, measuring less than 168 cm in width.
(d) The term "cheesecloth" means plain weave fabrics, weighing not more than 170 grams per square meter, containing not
more than 33 warp ends and filling picks per square centimeter, whether or not napped.
Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States Revision 18 (2026)
Annotated for Statistical Reporting Purposes
