LCD L33803: Urological Supplies

=== indication ===
For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit category, 2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable Medicare statutory and regulatory requirements. The purpose of a Local Coverage Determination (LCD) is to provide information regarding “reasonable and necessary” criteria based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions. In addition to the “reasonable and necessary” criteria contained in this LCD there are other payment rules, which are discussed in the following documents, that must also be met prior to Medicare reimbursement: The LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. The LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. For the items addressed in this LCD, the “reasonable and necessary” criteria, based on Social Security Act § 1862(a)(1)(A) provisions, are defined by the following coverage indications, limitations and/or medical necessity. The statutory coverage criteria for coverage of urological supplies are specified in the related Policy Article. The medical necessity for use of a greater quantity of supplies than the amounts specified in the policy must be well documented in the beneficiary's medical record and must be available upon request. INDWELLING CATHETERS (A4311, A4312, A4313, A4314, A4315, A4316, A4338, A4340, A4344, and A4346) No more than one catheter per month is covered for routine catheter maintenance. Non-routine catheter changes are covered when documentation substantiates medical necessity, such as for the following indications: Catheter is accidentally removed (e.g., pulled out by beneficiary) Malfunction of catheter (e.g., balloon does not stay inflated, hole in catheter) Catheter is obstructed by encrustation, mucous plug, or blood clot History of recurrent obstruction or urinary tract infection for which it has been established that an acute event is prevented by a scheduled change frequency of more than once per month A specialty indwelling catheter (A4340) or an all silicone catheter (A4344, A4312, or A4315) is covered when the criteria for an indwelling catheter (above) are met and there is documentation in the beneficiary's medical record to justify the medical need for that catheter (such as recurrent encrustation, inability to pass a straight catheter, or sensitivity to latex(not all-inclusive)). In addition, the particular catheter must be necessary for the beneficiary. If documentation is requested and does not substantiate medical necessity payment for A4340, A4344, A4312, or A4315 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. A three way indwelling catheter either alone (A4346) or with other components (A4313 or A4316) will be covered only if continuous catheter irrigation is reasonable and necessary. (Refer to the section "Continuous Irrigation of Indwelling Catheters" for indications for continuous catheter irrigations.) In other situations, A4346, A4313 and A4316 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. CATHETER INSERTION TRAY (A4297, A4310, A4311, A4312, A4313, A4314, A4315, A4316, A4353, and A4354) One insertion tray will be covered per episode of indwelling catheter insertion. More than one tray per episode will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. One intermittent catheter with insertion supplies (A4297, A4353) will be covered per episode of reasonable and necessary sterile intermittent catheterization (see below). URINARY DRAINAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM (A4314, A4315, A4316, A4354, A4357, A4358, A5102, and A5112) Payment will be made for routine changes of the urinary drainage collection system as noted below. Additional charges will be allowed for reasonable and necessary non-routine changes when the documentation substantiates the medical necessity, (e.g., obstruction, sludging, clotting of blood, or chronic, recurrent urinary tract infection). Usual Maximum Quantity of Supplies: Code Number per month A4314 1 A4315 1 A4316 1 A4354 1 A4357 2 A4358 2 A5112 1 Code Number per 3 month A5102 1 Leg bags are indicated for beneficiaries who are ambulatory or are chair or wheelchair bound. The use of leg bags for bedridden beneficiaries would be denied as not reasonable and necessary. If there is a catheter change (A4314, A4315, A4316, A4354) and an additional drainage bag (A4357) change within a month, the combined utilization for A4314, A4315, A4316, A4354, and A4357 should be considered when determining if additional documentation should be submitted with the claim. For example, if 1 unit of A4314 and 1 unit of A4357 are provided, this should be considered as two drainage bags, which is the usual maximum quantity of drainage bags needed for routine changes. Payment will be made for either a vinyl leg bag (A4358) or a latex leg bag (A5112). The use of both is not reasonable and necessary. The medical necessity for drainage bags containing absorbent material such as gel matrix or other material, which are intended to be disposed of on a daily basis has not been established. Claims for this type of bag will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. INTERMITTENT IRRIGATION OF INDWELLING CATHETERS Supplies for the intermittent irrigation of an indwelling catheter are covered when they are used on an as needed (non-routine) basis in the presence of acute obstruction of the catheter. Routine intermittent irrigations of a catheter will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Routine irrigations are defined as those performed at predetermined intervals. In individual cases, a copy of the order for irrigation and documentation in the beneficiary's medical record of the presence of acute catheter obstruction may be requested when irrigation supplies are billed. Covered supplies for reasonable and necessary non-routine irrigation of a catheter include either an irrigation tray (A4320) or an irrigation syringe (A4322), and sterile water/saline (A4217). When syringes, trays, sterile saline, or water are used for routine irrigation, they will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Irrigation solutions containing antibiotics and chemotherapeutic agents (A9270) will be denied as non-covered. Irrigating solutions such as acetic acid or hydrogen peroxide, which are used for the treatment or prevention of urinary obstruction (A4321), will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. CONTINUOUS IRRIGATION OF INDWELLING CATHETERS Supplies for continuous irrigation of a catheter are covered if there is a history of obstruction of the catheter and the patency of the catheter cannot be maintained by intermittent irrigation in conjunction with reasonable and necessary catheter changes. Continuous irrigation as a primary preventative measure (i.e., no history of obstruction) will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Documentation must substantiate the medical necessity of catheter irrigation and in particular continuous irrigation as opposed to intermittent irrigation. The records must also indicate the rate of solution administration and the duration of need. This documentation must be available upon request. Covered supplies for reasonable and necessary continuous bladder irrigation include a 3-way Foley catheter (A4313, A4316, and A4346), irrigation tubing set (A4355), and sterile water/saline (A4217). More than one irrigation tubing set per day for continuous catheter irrigation will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Irrigation solutions containing antibiotics and chemotherapeutic agents (A9270) will be denied as non-covered. Payment for irrigating solutions such as acetic acid or hydrogen peroxide will be based on the allowance for sterile water/saline (A4217). Continuous irrigation is a temporary measure. Continuous irrigation for more than 2 weeks is rarely reasonable and necessary. The beneficiary's medical records should indicate this medical necessity and these medical records must be available upon request. INTERMITTENT CATHETERIZATION Intermittent catheterization is covered when basic coverage criteria are met and the beneficiary or caregiver can perform the procedure. For each episode of covered catheterization, Medicare will cover: One catheter (A4351, A4352) and an individual packet of lubricant (A4332); or One catheter (A4295, A4296); or, One sterile intermittent catheter kit (A4297, A4353) if additional coverage criteria (see below) are met. Intermittent catheterization using a sterile intermittent catheter kit (A4297, A4353) is covered when the beneficiary requires catheterization and the beneficiary meets one of the following criteria (1-4): The beneficiary resides in a nursing facility, The beneficiary is immunosuppressed, for example (not all-inclusive): on a regimen of immunosuppressive drugs post-transplant, on cancer chemotherapy, has AIDS, has a drug-induced state such as chronic oral corticosteroid use, has a diagnosis of spinal cord injury at any level. (see the POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS section in the LCD-related Policy Article). The beneficiary has radiologically documented vesico-ureteral reflux while on a program of intermittent catheterization, The beneficiary has had distinct, recurrent urinary tract infections, while on a program of sterile intermittent catheterization with either A4295/A4296 with no sterile lubricant (A4332), or A4351/A4352 with sterile lubricant (A4332), twice within the 12-months prior to the initiation of sterile intermittent catheter kits. A beneficiary would be considered to have a urinary tract infection if they have a urine culture with greater than 10,000 colony forming units of a urinary pathogen AND concurrent presence of one or more of the following signs, symptoms or laboratory findings: Fever (oral temperature greater than 38º C [100.4º F]) Systemic leukocytosis Change in urinary urgency, frequency, or incontinence Appearance of new or increase in autonomic dysreflexia (sweating, bradycardia, blood pressure elevation) Physical signs of prostatitis, epididymitis, orchitis Increased muscle spasms Pyuria (greater than 5 white blood cells [WBCs] per high-powered field) Usual Maximum Quantity of Supplies: Code Number per Month A4295 200 A4296 200 A4297 200 A4332 200 A4351 200 A4352 200 A4353 200 Any combination of A4297 and A4353 200 Refer to Coding Guidelines section of the related Policy Article for contents of the kit (A4297, A4353). A4297 or A4353 should not be used for billing if the components are packaged separately rather than together as a kit. Separately provided components do not provide the equivalent degree of sterility achieved with an A4297 or A4353. If separate components are provided instead of a kit (A4297, A4353) they will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. The maximum quantity of sterile catheterization kits (A4297, A4353) is 200 units per month. Billing more than 200 units per month total for A4297 and A4353 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. When a Coude tip catheter (A4296, A4352) is used, there must be documentation in the beneficiary's medical record of the medical necessity for that catheter. An example would be the inability to catheterize with a straight tip catheter. This documentation must be available upon request. If documentation is requested and does not substantiate medical necessity, claims will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. EXTERNAL CATHETERS/URINARY COLLECTION DEVICES Male external catheters (condom-type) or female external urinary collection devices are covered for beneficiaries who have permanent urinary incontinence when used as an alternative to an indwelling catheter. The utilization of male external catheters (A4349) generally should not exceed 35 per month. Greater utilization of these devices must be accompanied by documentation of medical necessity. Male external catheters (condom-type) or female external urinary collection devices will be denied as not reasonable and necessary when ordered for beneficiaries who also use an indwelling catheter. Specialty type male external catheters (A4326) such as those that inflate or that include a faceplate or extended wear catheter systems are covered only when documentation substantiates the medical necessity for such a catheter. If documentation does not justify the medical need claims will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. For female external urinary collection devices, more than the following will be denied as not reasonable and necessary: One meatal cup (A4327) per week; or, One pouch (A4328) per day; or, One Tibbe Female External Urinary Device (EUD) (A4318) per day. INITIAL COVERAGE FOR THE INFLOW DEVICE The inFlow device (A4341) is considered to be reasonable and necessary as an alternative to intermittent catheterization for beneficiaries with Permanent Urinary Retention (PUR) due to Impaired Detrusor Contractility (IDC). One (1) inFlow device may be covered no more than once every 29 days. Claims for the inFlow device billed more than once every 29 days will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. CONTINUED COVERAGE FOR THE INFLOW DEVICE BEYOND THE FIRST THREE MONTHS OF THERAPY Continued coverage of the inFlow device beyond the first three months of therapy requires that, no sooner than the 31st day but no later than the 91st day after initiating therapy, the treating practitioner must conduct a clinical re-evaluation and document that the beneficiary continues to use and is benefiting from the inFlow device. Documentation of use and clinical benefit is demonstrated by: An in-person encounter by the treating practitioner with documentation that urinary symptoms are improved; and, The treating practitioner verifies the beneficiary’s adherence to use of the inFlow device. If the above criteria are not met, continued coverage of the inFlow device and related accessories will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. If the practitioner re-evaluation does not occur until after the 91st day but the evaluation demonstrates that the beneficiary is benefiting from the inFlow device as defined in criteria 1 and 2 above, continued coverage of the inFlow device will commence with the date of that re-evaluation. If there is discontinuation of usage of the inFlow device at any time, the supplier is expected to ascertain this and stop billing for the equipment and related accessories and supplies. MISCELLANEOUS SUPPLIES Appliance cleaner (A5131) is covered when used to clean the inside of certain urinary collecting appliances (A5102, A5105, A5112). More than one unit of service (16 oz.) per month is rarely reasonable and necessary. One external urethral clamp or compression device (A4356) is covered every 3 months or sooner if the rubber/foam casing deteriorates. Tape (A4450, A4452) which is used to secure an indwelling catheter to the beneficiary's body is covered. More than 10 units (1 unit = 18 sq. in.; 10 units = 180 sq. in. = 5 yds. of 1 inch tape) per month will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Adhesive catheter anchoring devices (A4333) and catheter leg straps (A4334) for indwelling urethral catheters are covered. More than 3 per week of A4333 or 1 per month of A4334 will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. A catheter/tube anchoring device (A5200) is covered and separately payable when it is used to anchor a covered suprapubic tube or nephrostomy tube. If code A5200 is used to anchor an indwelling urethral catheter, the claim will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Urethral inserts (A4336) are covered for adult females with stress incontinence (refer to the ICD-10 Codes section in the LCD-related Policy Article for applicable diagnoses) when basic coverage criteria are met and the beneficiary or caregiver can perform the procedure. They are not indicated for women: With bladder or other urinary tract infections (UTI) With a history of urethral stricture, bladder augmentation, pelvic radiation or other conditions where urethral catheterization is not clinically advisable Who are immunocompromised, at significant risk from UTI, interstitial cystitis, or pyelonephritis, or who have severely compromised urinary mucosa Unable to tolerate antibiotic therapy On anticoagulants With overflow incontinence or neurogenic bladder GENERAL A Standard Written Order (SWO) must be communicated to the supplier before a claim is submitted. If the supplier bills for an item addressed in this policy without first receiving a completed SWO, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. For Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) base items that require a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD), the supplier must have received a signed SWO before the DMEPOS item is delivered to a beneficiary. If a supplier delivers a DMEPOS item without first receiving a WOPD, the claim shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Refer to the LCD-related Policy Article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section. For DMEPOS base items that require a WOPD, and also require separately billed associated options, accessories, and/or supplies, the supplier must have received a WOPD which lists the base item and which may list all the associated options, accessories, and/or supplies that are separately billed prior to the delivery of the items. In this scenario, if the supplier separately bills for associated options, accessories, and/or supplies without first receiving a completed and signed WOPD of the base item prior to delivery, the claim(s) shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. An item/service is correctly coded when it meets all the coding guidelines listed in CMS HCPCS guidelines, LCDs, LCD-related Policy Articles, or DME MAC articles. Claims that do not meet coding guidelines shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary/incorrectly coded. Proof of delivery (POD) is a Supplier Standard and DMEPOS suppliers are required to maintain POD documentation in their files. Proof of delivery documentation must be made available to the Medicare contractor upon request. All services that do not have appropriate proof of delivery from the supplier shall be denied as not reasonable and necessary. REFILL REQUIREMENTS For DMEPOS items and supplies provided on a recurring basis, billing must be based on prospective, not retrospective use. For DMEPOS products that are supplied as refills to the original order, suppliers must contact the beneficiary, and document an affirmative response, prior to dispensing the refill and not automatically ship on a pre-determined basis, even if authorized by the beneficiary. This shall be done to ensure that the refilled item remains reasonable and necessary, existing supplies are expected to end, and to confirm any changes or modifications to the order. Contact with the beneficiary or designee regarding refills must take place no sooner than 30 calendar days prior to the expected end of the current supply. For delivery of refills, the supplier must deliver the DMEPOS product no sooner than 10 calendar days prior to the expected end of the current supply. This is regardless of which delivery method is utilized. For all DMEPOS items that are provided on a recurring basis, suppliers are required to have contact with the beneficiary or caregiver/designee and document an affirmative response, prior to dispensing a new supply of items. Suppliers must not deliver refills without a refill request and an affirmative response from a beneficiary. Items delivered without a valid, documented refill request will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. Suppliers must not dispense a quantity of supplies exceeding a beneficiary's expected utilization. Suppliers must stay attuned to changed or atypical utilization patterns on the part of their clients. Suppliers must verify with the treating practitioner that any changed or atypical utilization is warranted. Regardless of utilization, a supplier must not dispense more than a three (3) - month quantity at a time.

=== associated_info ===
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Section 1833(e) of the Social Security Act precludes payment to any provider of services unless "there has been furnished such information as may be necessary in order to determine the amounts due such provider." It is expected that the beneficiary's medical records will reflect the need for the care provided. The beneficiary's medical records include the treating practitioner’s office records, hospital records, nursing home records, home health agency records, records from other healthcare professionals and test reports. This documentation must be available upon request. GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS In order to justify payment for DMEPOS items, suppliers must meet the following requirements: SWO Medical Record Information (including continued need/use if applicable) Correct Coding Proof of Delivery Refer to the LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information regarding these requirements. Refer to the Supplier Manual for additional information on documentation requirements. Refer to the DME MAC web sites for additional bulletin articles and other publications related to this LCD. POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS Items covered in this LCD have additional policy-specific requirements that must be met prior to Medicare reimbursement. Refer to the LCD-related Policy article, located at the bottom of this policy under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information. MISCELLANEOUS APPENDICES UTILIZATION GUIDELINES Refer to Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity

=== summary_of_evidence ===
N/A

=== analysis_of_evidence ===
N/A

=== bibliography ===
N/A
