LCD L37535: Vitamin D Assay Testing
Contractors: Wellpoint Federal
Effective: 2026-04-01 00:00:00

=== indication ===
Hypovitaminosis D may result from inadequate intake, insufficient sunlight, malabsorption, liver, kidney and genetic disease. It results in the inadequate mineralization of bone. The CDC reported approximately 300,000 hip fractures, 60,000 fall-related deaths and 33 billion dollars in health care expenditures in 2014. This LCD identifies the indications and limitations of Medicare coverage for Vitamin D; 25 hydroxy and Vitamin D; 1, 25 dihydroxy laboratory assays in the medical management of patients.  Indications: Measurement of 25-OH Vitamin D level is indicated for patients with: 
 
 chronic kidney disease stage III or greater 
 cirrhosis 
 hypocalcemia 
 hypercalcemia 
 hypercalciuria 
 hypervitaminosis D 
 parathyroid disorders 
 malabsorption states 
 obstructive jaundice 
 osteomalacia 
 osteoporosis if: 
 i. T score on DEXA scan 
 ii. History of fragility fractures or 
 iii. FRAX> 3% 10-year probability of hip fracture or 20% 10-year probability of other major osteoporotic fracture or 
 iv. FRAX> 3% (any fracture) with T-score 
 v. Initiating bisphosphanate therapy (Vitamin D level and serum calcium levels should be determined and managed as necessary before bisphosphonate is initiated.) 
 
 osteosclerosis/petrosis 
 rickets 
 vitamin D deficiency on replacement therapy related to a condition listed above; to monitor the efficacy of treatment. 
 
 Measurement of 1, 25-OH Vitamin D level is indicated for patients with: 
 
 unexplained hypercalcemia (suspected granulomatous disease or lymphoma) 
 unexplained hypercalciuria (suspected granulomatous disease or lymphoma) 
 suspected genetic childhood rickets 
 suspected tumor-induced osteomalacia 
 nephrolithiasis or hypercalciuria 
 
 Limitations: 
 
 
 Both assays of vitamin D need not be performed for each of the above conditions. 
 
 
 Once a beneficiary has been shown to be vitamin D deficient, further testing may be medically necessary only to ensure adequate replacement has been accomplished. 
 
 
 If Vitamin D level is between 20 and 50 ng/ml and patient is clinically stable, repeat testing is often unnecessary; if performed, documentation must clearly indicate the necessity of the test. 
 
 
 If level 60 ng/ml are noted, a subsequent level(s) may be reimbursed until the level is within the normal range. 
 
 
 Testing may not be used for routine or other screening.

=== associated_info ===

