Article A52518: Seat Lift Mechanisms - Policy Article

=== description ===
NON-MEDICAL NECESSITY COVERAGE AND PAYMENT RULES For any item to be covered by Medicare, it must 1) be eligible for a defined Medicare benefit category, 2) be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member, and 3) meet all other applicable Medicare statutory and regulatory requirements. Information provided in this policy article relates to determinations other than those based on Social Security Act §1862(a)(1)(A) provisions (i.e. “reasonable and necessary”). Seat lift mechanisms are covered under the Durable Medical Equipment benefit (Social Security Act §1861(s)(6)). In order for a beneficiary’s equipment to be eligible for reimbursement the reasonable and necessary (R&N) requirements set out in the related Local Coverage Determination must be met. In addition, there are specific statutory payment policy requirements, discussed below, that also must be met. A seat lift mechanism placed over or on top of a toilet, any type (E0172) is non-covered. REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC DMEPOS ITEMS PURSUANT TO Final Rule 1713 (84 Fed. Reg Vol 217) Final Rule 1713 (84 Fed. Reg Vol 217) requires a face-to-face encounter and a Written Order Prior to Delivery (WOPD) for specified HCPCS codes. CMS and the DME MACs provide a list of the specified codes, which is periodically updated. The required Face-to-Face Encounter and Written Order Prior to Delivery List is available here . Claims for the specified items subject to Final Rule 1713 (84 Fed. Reg Vol 217) that do not meet the face-to-face encounter and WOPD requirements specified in the LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements Article (A55426) will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. If a supplier delivers an item prior to receipt of a WOPD, it will be denied as not reasonable and necessary. If the WOPD is not obtained prior to delivery, payment will not be made for that item even if a WOPD is subsequently obtained by the supplier. If a similar item is subsequently provided by an unrelated supplier who has obtained a WOPD, it will be eligible for coverage. POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS In addition to policy specific documentation requirements, there are general documentation requirements that are applicable to all DMEPOS policies. These general requirements are located in the DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS section of the LCD. Refer to the LCD-related Standard Documentation Requirements article, located at the bottom of this Policy Article under the Related Local Coverage Documents section for additional information regarding GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS and the POLICY SPECIFIC DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS discussed below. CERTIFICATE OF MEDICAL NECESSITY (CMN) Providers and suppliers no longer need to submit Certificate of Medical Necessity (CMN) for services rendered on or after January 1, 2023. For claims with dates of service on or after January 1, 2023 – Providers and suppliers no longer need to submit CMNs or DIFs with claims. Due to electronic filing requirements, claims received with these forms attached will be rejected and returned to the provider or supplier. For claims with dates of service prior to January 1, 2023 – If the CMN or DIF is required, it must be submitted with the claim, or be on file with a previous claim. For dates of service for which a CMN is required, a CMN, which has been completed, signed and dated by the treating practitioner, must be kept on file by the supplier, and made available upon request. The CMN may act as a substitute for the Standard Written Order (SWO) if it contains the same information as required in a SWO. The CMN for seat lift mechanisms is CMS Form 849. In addition to the order information that the treating practitioner enters in Section B, the supplier can use the space in Section C for a written confirmation of other details of the order or the treating practitioner can enter the other details directly. MODIFIERS GA, GZ, and KX MODIFIERS: Suppliers must add the KX modifier to claim lines billed for seat lift mechanisms only if all of the coverage criteria in the “Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity” section in the related LCD have been met and evidence of such is retained in the supplier’s files and available to the DME MAC upon request. If all of the criteria in the “Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity” section of the related LCD have not been met, the GA or GZ modifier must be added to the code. When there is an expectation of a medical necessity denial, suppliers must enter the GA modifier on the claim line if they have obtained a properly executed Advance Beneficiary Notice (ABN) or the GZ modifier if they have not obtained a valid ABN. Claim lines billed with codes without a KX, GA or GZ modifier will be rejected as missing information. CODING GUIDELINES A seat lift mechanism that is electrically operated is billed using HCPCS code E0627. A manually operated seat lift mechanism is billed using HCPCS code E0629. When providing a seat lift mechanism that is incorporated into a chair as a complete unit at the time of purchase, suppliers must bill the item using the established HCPCS code for the seat-lift mechanism. In this situation, the supplier may bill the seat lift mechanism using E0627 or E0629, and bill A9270 for the chair. A toilet seat lift mechanism (E0172) is a device with a seat that can be raised with or without a forward tilt while the beneficiary is seated, allowing the beneficiary to ambulate once he/she is in a more upright position. It may be manually operated or electric. It is attached to the toilet. (For information about seat lift mechanisms that are incorporated in a commode, see the Commodes policy.) Suppliers should contact the Pricing, Data Analysis and Coding (PDAC) Contractor for guidance on the correct coding of these items.

=== icd10_doc ===
Y
