Title: Anniken Prosser v. Xavier Becerra – CourtListener.com

URL Source: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4895011/anniken-prosser-v-xavier-becerra/

Markdown Content:
In the
United States Court of Appeals

 For the Seventh Circuit

 ____________________

No. 20-3070

ANNIKEN PROSSER,

 Plaintiff-Appellant,

 v.

XAVIER BECERRA, Secretary of the United States Department of

Health and Human Services,

 Defendant-Appellee.

 ____________________

Appeal from the United States District Court for the

 Eastern District of Wisconsin.

 No. 1:20-cv-00194 — William C. Griesbach, Judge.

 ____________________

ARGUED JANUARY 13, 2021 — DECIDED JUNE 25, 2021

 ____________________

Before FLAUM, BRENNAN, and SCUDDER, Circuit Judges.

 SCUDDER, Circuit Judge. Anniken Prosser suﬀers from an

aggressive brain cancer called glioblastoma multiforme. To

treat her disease, Prosser uses a promising electric ﬁeld treat-

ment called tumor treating ﬁelds therapy. She will receive this

therapy for the rest of her life. To pay for the therapy, Prosser

enrolled in the supplemental insurance program within Med-

icare Part B. She ﬁles a beneﬁts claim with Medicare for each

 2 No. 20-3070

period she receives TTF therapy. Medicare denied coverage

for the treatment period January to April 2018. Though

Prosser received the therapy and owed nothing out of pocket,

the denial left the supplier of the treatment, Novocure, Inc.,

with the bill. Prosser challenged this denial by availing herself

of Medicare’s multilayer appeals process, losing at each level

and eventually reaching federal court.

 The district court dismissed Prosser’s claim for Medicare

Part B coverage, holding that she has suﬀered no injury-in-

fact suﬃcient to satisfy Article III’s standing requirement. We

agree. Prosser received—and continues to receive—the TTF

therapy. She faces no ﬁnancial liability for the treatment pe-

riod Medicare denied coverage. And any future ﬁnancial risk

is too attenuated from the denial of the past coverage at issue

here and far too speculative to establish standing. We there-

fore lack authority to hear Prosser’s claim and aﬃrm the dis-

missal of her complaint.

 I

 A

 Anniken Prosser is a 37-year-old Medicare recipient who

suﬀers from glioblastoma. The disease, which causes a tumor

to grow and spread in the brain, is aggressive and deadly—

the ﬁve-year survival rate hovers around just 5%. As a refer-

ence point, this was the disease that took the lives of Senator

John McCain and Beau Biden, the eldest son of the President

of the United States.

 Though not curative, Prosser beneﬁts from tumor treating

ﬁelds therapy, commonly referred to as TTF therapy. The

therapy, approved by the FDA in 2011, works by slowing the

growth of brain tumors. For most of the day patients use a

 No. 20-3070 3

device that attaches to the head via four adhesive patches that

connect to a mobile power supply. The device emits electrical

ﬁelds to the tumor, which disrupt the division of cancer cells,

thereby slowing tumor growth. Early studies show that the

device holds promise in prolonging life.

 TTF therapy is available through a single supplier—a com-

pany called Novocure, which markets the device under the

commercial name Optune. Patients rent the Optune device on

a monthly basis. The therapy is expensive, and Prosser must

ﬁle a beneﬁts claim with Medicare for each period she uses

the device for TTF therapy.

 B

 Prosser receives coverage from Medicare Part B, a supple-

mentary medical insurance program administered by the Sec-

retary of Health and Human Services through the Centers for

Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS. Recipients pay a

monthly premium in exchange for certain types of coverage,

including for durable medical equipment like Novocure’s

Optune system. See 42 U.S.C. § 1395k. Part B does not cover

services that “are not reasonable and necessary for the diag-

nosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the func-

tioning of a malformed body member.” Id. § 1395y(a)(1)(A).

The Secretary has interpreted “reasonable and necessary” to

mean that an item or service must be safe and eﬀective, med-

ically necessary and appropriate, and not experimental in or-

der to qualify for reimbursement. See Medicare Program In-

tegrity Manual § 13.5.4.

 CMS makes individual coverage decisions by determining

whether a medical service is reasonable and necessary. While

this determination often applies to each treatment decision,

 4 No. 20-3070

there are ways to extend coverage determinations to speciﬁc

courses of treatment. These so-called local coverage determi-

nations (often shorthanded as LCDs) and national coverage

determinations guide the individual claims decisions made

by CMS.

 When individuals ﬁrst submit claims for coverage to Med-

icare Part B, they do so to local contractors who determine if

the services or devices are covered or otherwise reimbursable

under Medicare. See

42 C.F.R. § 405.920

(a). Contractors may

issue a local coverage determination that categorically de-

cides whether a treatment is covered, a determination that be-

comes binding on the issuing contractor for future claims. See

42 U.S.C. § 1395ﬀ(f)(2)(B).

    A beneﬁciary disagreeing with the initial determination of

coverage can appeal. Appeals proceed in four stages within

the Medicare system. First, the beneﬁciary may request a re-

determination from the Medicare contractor. See 42 U.S.C.

§ 1395ﬀ(a)(3); 
42 C.F.R. § 405.940

. At the second level, the ben-

eﬁciary may seek reconsideration by a qualiﬁed independent

contractor. See 42 U.S.C. § 1395ﬀ(b)(1)(A). A local coverage

determination is not binding once a beneﬁciary reaches this

stage of review. Claimants still unsatisﬁed with a coverage

determination may proceed to step three by requesting a

hearing through the Oﬃce of Medicare Hearings and Ap-

peals, at which point the dispute is assigned to an administra-

tive law judge for decision. See 42 U.S.C. § 1395ﬀ(b)(1)(A), (d).

A claimant may appeal an unfavorable decision by an ALJ to

the Medicare Appeals Council, which represents the ﬁnal de-

cision of the Secretary. If the Council either aﬃrms the cover-

age denial or does not render a decision within a 90-day

timeframe, a beneﬁciary may bring a claim in federal district

No. 20-3070                                                    5
court. See id. § 1395ﬀ(b)(1)(A) (incorporating

42 U.S.C.

§ 405

(g)’s judicial review provisions).

   Even when a beneﬁts claim is denied at any level of the

appeals process, the beneﬁciary is not necessarily stuck pay-

ing a medical bill. If neither the supplier nor the beneﬁciary

knew or could reasonably have been expected to know that

the claim would not be covered, Medicare will nevertheless

pay for the service. See 
id.

 § 1395pp; 
42 C.F.R. § 411.400

(a).

This provision limits liability only once—after that, both the

beneﬁciary and supplier are on notice that coverage is likely

to be denied. In that way, § 1395pp provides suppliers and

beneﬁciaries alike the beneﬁt of the doubt and shields them

both from ﬁnancial liability the ﬁrst time Medicare denies

coverage. It seems that providers and participants call this

one-time liability limitation the Medicare “mulligan.”

    But coverage denials are not always a risk-free proposition

for a beneﬁciary. Suppliers may shift the risk of non-coverage

solely to the beneﬁciary when they give advance written no-

tice, often referred to as an Advance Beneﬁciary Notice, in-

forming the beneﬁciary that Medicare is unlikely to cover the

claim. See 
42 C.F.R. § 411.404

(a), (b). Medical device suppli-

ers—as opposed to healthcare providers in general—bear an

additional burden should they wish to shift the risk that cov-

erage may be denied: they must obtain a written agreement

by the patient that she will individually bear the cost of cov-

erage denial. See 42 U.S.C. § 1395m(j)(4) (incorporating 42

U.S.C. § 1395m(a)(18)(A)(ii)); Medicare Claims Processing

Manual ch. 30, § 30.1. In these ways, suppliers like Novocure

are able to limit their ﬁnancial risk while still providing inno-

vative healthcare solutions like TTF therapy.

6                                                  No. 20-3070
C

 Prosser was prescribed the TTF therapy in June 2016. The

therapy generated monthly Medicare claims. TTF therapy is

often covered by private insurers. Medicare, however, had a

local coverage determination in place—LCD L34823—that de-

nied coverage for TTF therapy performed on or after October

1, 2015 as not reasonable and necessary for the treatment of

glioblastoma. After requests for reconsideration of the LCD

by patients and suppliers alike through a separate adminis-

trative review process, Medicare revised LCD L34823 to cover

TTF therapy as reasonable and necessary as of September 1,

2019. This revision of LCD L34823 did not come until after the

ALJ decision denying coverage to Prosser.

 Prosser submits coverage claims to Medicare for every

three-to-four-month period she receives the TTF therapy. She

exhausted the administrative review process within the Med-

icare program each time. Along the way, Prosser received two

favorable coverage decisions, including one in May 2019.

 But Prosser received an unfavorable coverage decision

too. The decision came from a diﬀerent ALJ in June 2019, just

a month after a favorable decision granting coverage. The de-

nial of coverage applied to TTF therapy provided by Novo-

cure to Prosser from January through April 2018. Given the

LCD in place at the time, the ALJ concluded, Novocure

should have known that the therapy was not covered by Med-

icare. Although Medicare would not pay the claim, it was No-

vocure, not Prosser, that the ALJ left with the bill, as Prosser

did not sign an advance beneﬁciary notice acknowledging her

liability. This presents the only unfavorable decision Prosser

received through the Medicare appeals process.

 No. 20-3070 7

Having exhausted her administrative remedies for the

coverage denial for the period January through April 2018,

Prosser ﬁled a complaint against the Secretary in the Eastern

District of Wisconsin in February 2020. Recall that Prosser had

received a favorable ALJ decision a month before the subse-

quent ALJ decision denying coverage. This is the thrust of

why Prosser escalated this appeal to federal court—she wants

steady and consistent Medicare Part B coverage for TTF ther-

apy on a going-forward basis. To Prosser’s mind, the initial

favorable ALJ determinations should bind future coverage

determinations, and she should not have to go through the

Medicare claims review process every time she gets the TTF

therapy.

 Two months after ﬁling in federal court, Prosser moved for

partial summary judgment, seeking to prevent the Secretary

from denying the TTF therapy for her glioblastoma because a

previous ALJ decision had concluded it was medically rea-

sonable and necessary. The Secretary moved for partial sum-

mary judgment too, insisting that ALJ-level decisions are

case-by-case, nonprecedential decisions.

 In July 2020 the district court entered partial summary

judgment for the Secretary, concluding that administrative

Medicare coverage decisions made by ALJs did not bind fu-

ture coverage decisions. Put another way, the doctrine of col-

lateral estoppel does not apply to these administrative cover-

age decisions.

 In October 2020 the Secretary moved for full summary

judgment, this time arguing that Prosser lacked Article III

standing. The Secretary contended that Prosser had no inter-

est in the case, since all along she received the TTF therapy yet

paid nothing. The district court granted the Secretary’s

 8 No. 20-3070

motion, concluding that Prosser lacked standing. Since sup-

pliers are prohibited from charging beneﬁciaries the costs of

denied claims without them signing in advance an acknowl-

edgement of personal liability and there is no evidence that

Prosser signed such a notice, it was the supplier Novocure—

not Prosser—who bore the costs of having provided the TTF

therapy to Prosser. Nor, the district court added, did anything

in the record suggest that Prosser has been unable to receive

the therapy. In other words, because Prosser was receiving

the therapy and faced no ﬁnancial liability for the denial of

coverage relating to past treatment, the district court con-

cluded that she lacked an injury and therefore had no stand-

ing to sue.

 Prosser now appeals.

 II

 A

 We begin, as we must, with subject matter jurisdiction.

Only if Prosser has standing can we proceed to the merits of

her argument that ALJ coverage determinations bind future

coverage determinations for the same type of treatment.

 The Constitution’s Case or Controversy requirement lim-

its federal courts to resolving concrete disputes between ad-

verse parties. See Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife,

[504 U.S. 555](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/112747/lujan-v-defenders-of-wildlife/)

, 560–61

(1992). Article III, in short, “prevents federal courts from an-

swering legal questions, however important, before those

questions have ripened into actual controversies between

someone who has experienced (or imminently faces) an injury

and another whose action or inaction caused (or risks caus-

ing) that injury.” Sweeney v. Raoul, 
[990 F.3d 555, 559](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4861849/james-sweeney-v-kwame-raoul/#559)

 (7th Cir.

2021).

No. 20-3070                                                     9
The justiciability doctrines, including the doctrine of

standing, give eﬀect to this limitation. Standing “limits the

category of litigants empowered to maintain a lawsuit in fed-

eral court to seek redress for a legal wrong,” and in that way,

“conﬁnes the federal courts to a properly judicial role.”

Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins,

[136 S. Ct. 1540, 1547](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/#1547)

 (2016). To meet “the

irreducible constitutional minimum of standing,” a plaintiﬀ

must have suﬀered an injury in fact traceable to the defendant

that is capable of being redressed through a favorable judicial

ruling. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560–61.

    To establish injury in fact, Prosser must show that she suf-

fered “an invasion of a legally protected interest” that is “con-

crete and particularized” and “actual or imminent, not con-

jectural or hypothetical.” Id. at 560 (cleaned up). Concreteness

demands that an injury “actually exist,” but it need not be tan-

gible or ﬁnancial. Spokeo, 136 S. Ct. at 1548–49. A plaintiﬀ may

have standing to enforce an intangible injury, so long as it is

concrete. See id. When considering an allegation of intangible

harm, the Supreme Court instructs us to look to the history of

the common law and the judgment of Congress. See id. at

1549. Though Congress has “the power to deﬁne intangible

harms as legal injuries for which a plaintiﬀ can seek relief,”

Casillas v. Madison Ave. Assoc., Inc., 
[926 F.3d 329, 333](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4626052/paula-casillas-v-madison-avenue-associates-inc/#333)

 (7th Cir.

2019), a plaintiﬀ does not “automatically satisf[y] the injury-

in-fact requirement whenever a statute grants a person a stat-

utory right and purports to authorize that person to sue to

vindicate that right.” Spokeo, 
[136 S. Ct. at 1549](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/#1549)

. Even in the

context of an alleged statutory violation, then, a plaintiﬀ must

identify a concrete injury. See 
[id.](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/)

   In the absence of an actual injury, standing may still exist

in the face of a threatened injury if that future injury is

10                                                    No. 20-3070
certainly impending—in a word, imminent. See Lujan,

[504 U.S. at 564](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/112747/lujan-v-defenders-of-wildlife/)

 n.2 (“Although ‘imminence’ is concededly a

somewhat elastic concept, it cannot be stretched beyond its

purpose, which is to ensure that the alleged injury is not too

speculative for Article III purposes—that the injury is ‘cer-

tainly impending.’” (quoting Whitmore v. Arkansas, 
[495 U.S. 149, 158](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/112418/whitmore-ex-rel-simmons-v-arkansas/#158)

 (1990))); Dep’t of Com. v. New York, 
[139 S. Ct. 2551, 2565](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4633471/department-of-commerce-v-new-york/#2565)

(2019) (explaining that imminence requires a showing that

“there is a substantial risk that the harm will occur”). The Su-

preme Court has “repeatedly reiterated that threatened injury

must be certainly impending to constitute injury in fact, and

that allegations of possible future injury are not suﬃcient.”

Clapper v. Amnesty Int’l USA, 
[568 U.S. 398, 409](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/821306/clapper-v-amnesty-international-usa/#409)

 (2013) (cleaned

up).

                                B

    Our inquiry begins and ends with Article III standing’s in-

jury-in-fact requirement. Prosser received TTF therapy for the

relevant period of January through April 2018 at no cost to

herself. She is not out of pocket anything for the therapy and

does not contend that Novocure (or any other supplier) has a

claim against her. Nor has she alleged facts suggesting that

any personal liability for past TTF therapy is imminent. To the

contrary, the supplier Novocure has shouldered the treatment

costs. Even more, the ALJ found that the cost of the TTF ther-

apy would be borne solely by Novocure, as the company

never presented Prosser with an advanced beneﬁciary notice.

    On these facts, Prosser has not demonstrated the requisite

injury to establish Article III standing. While this dooms

Prosser’s present appeal, should her situation change—say,

for example, if she signs an advanced beneﬁciary notice and

Medicare denies coverage for a treatment in the future—so,

No. 20-3070                                                   11
too, may a future court’s analysis of her standing to sue

change. Here, however, we can do nothing but dismiss

Prosser’s claim for want of jurisdiction.

 Prosser responds by contending that she receives supple-

mental insurance coverage from Medicare. With that cover-

age, she claims, comes a substantive statutory right to pay-

ment by Medicare. The denial of coverage for the treatment

period January to March 2018, in her view, infringes that sub-

stantive right and therefore amounts to an injury for Article

III standing purposes.

 Not so. Congress, in enacting Medicare, did not endow an

individual with a substantive right to payment by Medicare

each and every time they submit a claim. After all—and as the

facts here show—Medicare payments most often go to the

supplier or provider, not the recipient of care.

 Congress may create and elevate rights by statute while

also providing a cause of action to sue in federal court to en-

force these rights. But that alone is not enough to establish

constitutional standing under Article III. See Spokeo,

[136 S. Ct. at 1549](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/#1549)

. Beneﬁciaries like Prosser can obtain review of a cov-

erage denial in federal court after exhausting the Medicare ap-

peals process. But mere use of that process cannot, in and of

itself, create an injury in fact.

    Our reasoning parallels the Supreme Court’s standing

analysis in Thole v. U.S. Bank N.A., 
[140 S. Ct. 1615](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4757654/thole-v-u-s-bank-n-a/)

 (2020). In

Thole, the Court concluded that a pair of retirees lacked Article

III standing to bring an ERISA claim against a bank for mis-

managing a retirement plan, despite the statute providing a

cause of action, because the plaintiﬀs’ monthly payouts from

the deﬁned beneﬁt plan would be unaﬀected by a ruling, win

12                                                   No. 20-3070
or lose. See

[id. at 1619](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4757654/thole-v-u-s-bank-n-a/#1619)

. The Court underscored that it has re-

peatedly “rejected the argument that ‘a plaintiﬀ automatically

satisﬁes the injury-in-fact requirement whenever a statute

grants a person a statutory right and purports to authorize

that person to sue to vindicate that right.’” 
[Id.](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4757654/thole-v-u-s-bank-n-a/)

 at 1620 (quoting

Spokeo, 
[136 S. Ct. at 1549](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/#1549)

).

    What this means here is that Prosser must still identify a

concrete injury, notwithstanding the statutory right Congress

supplied her to appeal a Medicare coverage decision. See 
[id.](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/)

at 1620–21; Spokeo, 
[136 S. Ct. at 1549](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/3203762/spokeo-inc-v-robins/#1549)

. She has not done so.

    Nor does Prosser’s alleged loss of the one-time limitation

of liability under 42 U.S.C. § 1395pp amount to a concrete in-

jury. Section 1395pp states that Medicare will pay a claim if

neither the supplier nor the beneﬁciary knew or could reason-

ably have been expected to know that the particular treatment

would not be covered. This provision alone does not show

that Prosser suﬀered a concrete injury. For one, the prior ver-

sion of LCD L34823 may have already triggered the one-time

liability limitation—that protection is gone regardless of the

ALJ’s June 2019 decision denying coverage. And recall that

the ALJ concluded that the previous version of LCD L34823

denying coverage for TTF therapy put Novocure on notice

that the therapy it chose to provide Prosser was not covered

under Medicare Part B. Novocure itself would be ﬁnancially

liable in the event of coverage denial, not Prosser. Remember,

too, that Prosser is protected by another layer of insulation

from ﬁnancial liability. Medicare regulations prevent suppli-

ers from charging beneﬁciaries the costs incurred after a de-

nial of coverage except in cases where they provide the bene-

ﬁciary with advance notice that Medicare is likely to deny

coverage for the treatment. See 
42 C.F.R. § 411.404

.

No. 20-3070                                                  13
In addition to the advance notice requirement, there is yet

a further layer of protection for recipients of medical equip-

ment and devices. Medical device suppliers must also obtain

a written agreement from the beneﬁciary, acknowledging that

the recipient will be personally liable if Medicare denies cov-

erage for the treatment. See 42 U.S.C. § 1395m(j)(4) (incorpo-

rating 42 U.S.C. § 1395m(a)(18)(A)(ii)); Medicare Claims Pro-

cessing Manual ch. 30, § 30.1. Here, Novocure never obtained

that agreement from Prosser, which means Prosser owes the

company nothing.

 Prosser makes one ﬁnal go at establishing an injury in fact,

positing that she may incur ﬁnancial liability in future cover-

age determinations for TTF therapy. But that suggestion is far

too attenuated from the instant appeal and far too speculative

at this juncture to suﬃce for an imminent injury. True, Prosser

suﬀers from an incurable condition and will likely need TTF

therapy for the remainder of her life. But the many favorable

ALJ decisions—and even the unfavorable decision on ap-

peal—show that the risk of ﬁnancial liability is speculative at

best.

 Far too many steps lay between the instant coverage de-

nial and any future liability. Novocure would need to require

Prosser to sign an advanced beneﬁciary notice, acknowledg-

ing her own ﬁnancial liability should Medicare deny coverage

for the therapy. The company has not done so, and there is

nothing in the record to suggest it might do so in the future.

 Most fatal to Prosser’s imminent injury argument, how-

ever, is the Medicare program’s own recent activity. The re-

cently revised LCD L34823, eﬀective as of September 2019,

provides that TTF therapy is presumed reasonable and neces-

sary for the treatment of glioblastoma. At this point, then, we

 14 No. 20-3070

have no facts before us suggesting that Prosser is at imminent

risk of being denied coverage.

 * * *

 By all accounts, TTF therapy has shown great promise in

ﬁghting glioblastoma. The record before us shows that, dur-

ing the period at issue, Prosser received the therapy and owes

nothing for it even though Medicare denied one of her cover-

age claims. If for some reason she does not receive coverage

in the future and as a result is denied the therapy or faces ﬁ-

nancial liability, Prosser will be able to avail herself of the ap-

peals process, and if necessary, seek judicial review from

there.

 For these reasons, we AFFIRM.
