ALLEN  COUNTY  PUBLIC 


1833  01848  2 


GC 

974.802 

P53BH 


V 


j 


CENTENNIAL  MEETING 


OF  THE 

PHILADELPHIA  CONTRIBUTIONSHIP 


FOR 

THE  INSURANCE  OF  HOUSES 

FROM 

LOSS  BY  FIRE. 


SECOND  MONDAY  OF  APRIL,  1852. 


PRINTED  BY  ORDER  OF  THE  COMPANY. 

C.  SHERMAN,  PRINTER. 

1852. 


i 


Reprinted  under  a Resolution  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of 
The  Philadelphia  Contributionship, 

March  27,  1876. 

' Jas.  Somers  Smith, 

Secretary. 


CENTENNIAL  ANNIVERSAKY. 


At  a general  Meeting  of  the  Members  of  the  Phila- 
delphia Contributionship  for  the  Insurance  of  Houses 
from  Loss  by  Fire,  held  pursuant  to  Charter,  on  Mon- 
day, April  the  twelfth,  eighteen  hundred  and  fifty- 
two,  Benjamin  Jones,  Jr.,  was  appointed  Chairman, 
and  Win.  B.  Fling,  Secretary. 

An  election  was  then  held  for  twelve  Directors  and 
a Treasurer  for  the  ensuing  year,  when  the  following 
persons  were  chosen  : 


DIRECTORS. 


JOSHUA  LONGSTRETH, 


ALEX.  W.  JOHNSTON,  ' 


HORACE  BINNEY, 
WILLIAM  H.  HART, 
WILLIAM  SMITH, 
LEWIS  WALN, 


J.  PEMBERTON  HUTCHINSON 
JOSEPH  SWIFT, 


HENRY  J.  WILLIAMS, 
RICHARD  P.  LARDNER, 
DR.  J.  RODMAN  PAUL. 


DR.  CHAS.  WILLING, 


T 11  J:  A S U 11  E R. 


JAMES  S.  SMITH. 

JUDGES  IN  BEHALF  OF  THE  BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS. 

WILLIAM  H.  HART,  WILLIAM  SMITH, 

DR.  J.  RODMAN  PAUL. 

JUDGES  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  CONTRIBUTORS. 

BENJAMIN  JONES,  Jr.,  J.  FISHER  LEAMING, 

WILLIAM  HARMAR,  WILLIAM  B.  FLING, 

GEORGE  CAMPBELL,  JAMES  S.  NEWBOLD, 

R.  E.  GRAY. 

The  election  being  over,  the  names  of  the  persons 
elected  Directors  and  Treasurer  were  reported  by  the 
Judges  to  the  General  Meeting,  as  required  by  the 
Charter. 

This  being*  the  Hundredth  Anniversary  of  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Philadelphia  Contributionship, 
Horace  Binney,  Esquire,  the  Chairman  of  the  Board 
of  Directors,  at  their  request  delivered  an  Address, 
giving  a succinct  and  interesting  sketch  of  the  origin, 
progress,  and  present  state  of  the  Company,  and  of 
the  statistics  of  insurance  against  fire,  both  in  this 
country  and  Europe. 

On  motion,  the  following  Resolutions  were  unani- 
mously adopted. 


The  Members  of  the  Philadelphia  Contributionship, 
assembled  on  the  Hundredth  Anniversary  of  theorgani- 
zation  of  the  Company,  deem  it  proper  to  express  and 
record  their  opinion,  that  the  principles  upon  which  it 
was  founded,  viz.,  not  merely  the  mutual  security  of 
the  members,  but  for  the  common  security  and  advan- 
tage of  their  fellow-citizens  and  neighbours,  and  the 
promoting  of  a great  and  public  good,  apart  from  all 
motives  of  private  and  separate  gain,”  have  been  most 
successful!}^ established  by  the  experience  of  a century, 
during  which  full  indemnity  has  been  afforded  to  its 
members,  all  losses  promptly  and  satisfactorily  adj  usted 
without  controversy  or  litigation,  and  no  privation 
caused  to  any  by  the  loss  or  diminution  of  dividends. 

Possessing  an  ample  capital  in  proportion  to  liabili- 
ties, and  conducted  on  the  principles  which  have 
always  regulated  its  Directors,  the  members  see  no 
limit  to  the  usefulness  or  duration  of  the  Institution, 
which,  like  the  oak  at  the  end  of  a century,  may  be 
considered  in  its  prime. 

Resolved,  That  the  thanks  of  this  meeting  be  pre- 
sented to  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors, 
Horace  Binney,  Esquire,  for  his  able,  instructive,  and 
eloquent  address,  and  that  he  be  requested  Avdien  his 
leisure  will  permit  to  reduce  it  to  writing,  in  order 


G 


that  it  iriay  be  printed  by  the  Directors  for  the  use  of 
the  Contributors. 

The  meeting  then  adjourned. 

Benjamin  Jones,  Jr., 

Chairman. 

Wm.  B.  Fling, 

Secretary'. 


Office  of  the  Philadelphia  Contributionship, 

April  13,  1852. 

Dear  Sir  : — 

In  compliance  with  the  instructions  of  the  Directors, 
I send  to  you  the  foregoing  copy  of  the  Minutes  of  the 
proceedings  of  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Members  of 
the  Philadelphia  Contributionship  for  the  Insurance 
of  Houses  from  Loss  by  Fire,  held  on  the  twelfth  in- 
stant, the  Centennial  Anniversary  of  the  organization 
of  the  Company. 

The  able  and  instructive  Address  then  deliverd  bv 

t/ 

you,  was,  I am  aware,  extemporaneous,  and  the  reduc- 
ing of  it  to  writing,  must  (especially  in  the  present 
state  of  your  eyes)  be  attended  with  some  difficulty. 
The  warm  interest,  however,  which  you  have  always 


7 


shown  in  the  affairs  of  the  Company,  and  of  which  your 
acceding  to  the  wish  of  the  Directors  by  delivering 
the  Address  is  an  additional  proof,  induces  the  hope 
that  you  will  comply  with  the  request  of  the  members, 
made  by  acclamation  at  an  unusually  large  meeting. 

I am  very  truly  and  respectfully  yours, 

James  S.  Smith, 

Secretary  and  Treasurer. 

Horace  Binney,  Esq. 


South  Fourth  Strket, 
April  28,  1852. 

Dear  Sir  : — 

I send  you  a sketch  of  what  I said  at  the  Centennial 
Meeting  of  the  Company,  in  conformity  with  the  re- 
quest of  the  Contributors,  a minute  of  which  accom- 
panied your  obliging  note.  Some  of  my  remarks  I 
may  not  have  recalled,  and  some  of  them  I have  per- 
haps written  out  with  more  detail  than  I gave  to  them 
orally.  Such  as  I have  been  able  to  recall,  I send  to 
the  Directors  with  pleasure,  and  hope  that  they  may 


8 


revive  an  agreeable  recollection  of  the  day  in  the  con- 
tributors who  were  present. 

I remain,  very  truly, 

Your  friend  and  servant, 

Horace  Binney. 


James  S.  Smith,  Esq., 

Secretary  and  Treasurer. 


MR.  BINNEY’S  ADDRESS. 


Mr.  Chairman  : — 

In  behalf  of  the  Directors  and  Treasurer,  re-elected 
to  office,  I beg  leave  to  express  the  acknowledgments 
due  for  the  continuance  of  your  confidence  and  appro- 
bation. They  have  heretofore  managed  the  business 
of  the  Company  in  a manner  that  I believe  has  satis- 
fied everybody.  They  have  settled  all  losses  that 
have  occurred,  in  a spirit  of  liberality  to  the  contribu- 
tors who  have  suffered  by  fire,  and  in  a spirit  of  justice 
to  the  whole  body  of  contributors.  They  will  continue 
to  execute  their  offices  in  the  same  spirit.  It  is  the 
right  spirit  in  all  Insurance  Companies.  It  is  espe- 
cially so  in  a Mutual  Fire  Insurance  Company.  The 
effect  of  such  an  administration  is  seen  in  the  increas- 
ing number  of  contributors,  and  in  the  great  solidity 
of  the  institution. 

At  a common  annual  meeting  of  the  Compjiny,  this 
is  perhaps  all  that  it  would  have  been  proper  to  say. 
Our  annual  meetings  are  less  distinguished  by  speeches, 
than  by  votes  and  deeds.  We  listen  to  the  annual 
report  of  the  Directors  upon  the  operations  of  the  past 
year,  and  upon  the  present  condition  of  the  office,  have 
a little  agreeable  discussion  at  the  cold  table  in  the 


10 


other  room,  set  lire  to  a segar  or  two,  and  hiirri  them 
out  with  small  loss,  vote,  declare  the  result,  and  retire 
with  a decided  feeling  of  comfort.  The  exceptions  to 
this  rule  have  been  very  rare. 

But  this  is  not  a common  annual  meeting ; and  within 
the  past  week,  the  Directors  have  thought  that  you 
would  expect  it  to  be  noticed  by  some  more  words  than 
usual ; and  they  have  done  me  the  honour  to  request, 
that,  as  the  Chairman  of  their  Board,  I would  infor- 
mally express  them  to  you  in  a brief  review  of  the 
Company  since  its  institution.  If  the  request  had  been 
made  at  an  earlier  day,  and  the  state  of  my  health  had 
permitted,  I should  have  endeavoured  to  do  this  in  a 
manner  more  worthy  of  your  attention,  than  I can 
hope  to  do  it  extemporaneously ; but  I do  not  know 
that  even  a longer  allowance  of  time  would  have 
enabled  me  to  write  out  my  remarks,  an  exercise  by 
no  means  agreeable  to  my  eyes,  though  it  would  cer- 
tainly have  permitted  me  to  think  more  and  better  of 
what  it  is  fitting  to  say  to  you.  What  I shall  say, 
will  no  doubt  be  received  with  indulgence,  and  it  will 
be  said  in  an  unpretending  way,  and  with  all  the  sim- 
plicity in  my  power. 

It  is  one  hundred  years  this  day  since  the  first  orga- 
nization of  this  Company.  The  first  election  of  twelve 
Directors  and  a Treasurer,  to  put  the  Company  into 
action,  was  held  on  the  second  Monday  in  April,  one 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty- two.  We  are  to-day 
a hundred  years  old  ; and  what  a century  it  has  been ! 
I do  not  mean  in  regard  to  the  world  at  large;  that  is 


I 


11 

a different  theme,  and  the  development  of  many  things 
in  the  century  belonging  to  the  world  at  large,  much 
more  wonderful  than  our  own.  But  what  a century  it 
has  been  for  this  association  ! We  began  a hundred 
years  ago  with  nothing  but  a good  thought,  a seed, 
which  when  it  was  sown,  was  no  bigger  than  a grain 
of  mustard  seed,  ^4ess  than  all  the  seeds  that,  be  in  the 
earth  and  at  this  day  how  many  lodge  in  security 
under  the  shadow  of  the  tree  that  has  sprung  up  from 
it!  A century  ago,  not  an  inhabitant  of  this  city  pos- 
sessed a dollar  of  indemnity  against  the  loss  of  his 
dwelling  by  fire.  To-day  this  Company  insures  eight 
millions  of  property  in  brick  and  stone  buildings,  and 
holds  seven  hundred  thousand  dollars  of  effective  well- 
secured  funds  to  indemnify  the  loss  that  may  happen 
to  them  by  fire.  I speak  in  round  numbers,  but  with 
little  variance  from  the  literal  facts.  It  holds  this 
security  after  paying  in  the  last  two  years,  more  than 
a hundred  thousand  dollars  for  such  losses.  It  was 
indeed  a great  and  prolific  thought,  and  great  honour 
is  due  to  those  who  first  conceived  it  among  us,  or  who 
first  obtained  the  seed  from  elsewhere  to  plant  it  here. 
If  I knew  the  father  of  this  thought,  I would  honour 
him  as  among  the  great  benefactors  of  his  race,  as  one 
of  those  rare  persons  who  are  in  advance  of  the  age 
in  which  they  live.  It  would  give  me  particular  de- 
light if  I should  find  him  to  have  been  a citizen  of  our 
own  city,  if  I could  find  that  the  thought  of  a Mutual 
Assurance  Company  for  the  insurance  of  the  houses  of 
its  members  from  loss  by  fire,  was  a conception  of  our 


12 


own  coimtr}^  and  especially  of  our  own  city.  My  in- 
quiries, however,  prevent  me  from  holding  this  agree- 
able opinion;  but  I entertain  no  doubt,  that  although 
the  conception  belongs  to  another  country,  the  seed  was 
first  planted  in  Philadelphia  among  all  the  cities  of  the 
now  United  States,  and  I will  name  the  persons,  and 
endeavor  to  name  the  leading  individual  among 
them,  to  whom  the  praise  of  planting  it  and  protecting 
it  in  its  earliest  growth  is  due. 

Mr.  Chairman,  we  were  not  very  far  behind  the 
earliest  in  the  establishment  of  such  a cojnpany  any- 
where. Our  Company  was  established  upon  its  pre- 
sent foundation  in  the  very  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century  ; and  I am  unable  to  find  a trace  of  anything 
similar  anywhere,  before  the  very  close,  in  the  last 
five  years,  of  the  seventeenth.  I have  been  led  to 
believe  that  insurance  by  either  companies  or  indivi- 
duals against  loss  to  houses  or  buildings  by  fire,  was 
unknown  before  that  date.  I mean  of  course  to  con- 
fine myself  to  insurances  against  fire  on  land,  and  upon 
houses  or  buildings,  and  not  to  include  insurance  upon 
merchandise  on  land,  though  1 have  found  no  trace  of 
the  latter,  and  know  that  companies  to  insure  mer- 
chandise on  shore,  were  of  subsequent  introduction 
into  England. 

Considering  the  present  state  of  fire  insurance  in 
England  and  in  this  country,  its  immense  expansion, 
the  amount  of  such  insurances  in  England  in  the  year 
1849,  as  ascertained  from  the  stamp  duties,  having 
been  811,000,000  sterling,  four  thousand  millions  of 


13 


dollars,  demonstrating  its  perfect  adaptation  to  the 
wants  of  society,  which  have  been  the  same  for  many 
centuries,  how  can  we  account  for  its  comparatively 
recent  introduction  among  an  intelligent,  active,  com- 
mercial people,  having  the  analogy  of  marine  insurance 
to  warn  and  to  prompt  them,  and  suffering  immense 
injury  in  their  property  almost  every  day  for  the  want 
of  it?  It  is  a problem  by  no  means  easy  to  solve. 

Marine  insurance^  it  is  supposed,  was  known  and  in 
use  as  early  as  the  very  beginning  of  the  Christian  era. 
The  use  has  very  reasonably  been  thought  to  have  re- 
ceived great  development  at  a considerably  later  period 
by  the  invention  of  bills  of  exchange,  which  required 
that  shipments  to  put  funds  into  the  hands  of  the 
acceptor,  should  be  protected  by  insurance  on  their 
passage.  The  practice  has  been  co-extensive  with 
modern  commerce,  and  has  been  in  general  and  indeed 
universal  use  for  many  centuries.  How  extraordinary, 
that,  with  this  contract  in  habitual  daily  use  before 
them,  insuring  their  property  at  sea  against  perils  of 
the  sea,  and  fire  also,  the  men  of  England,  so  prudent 
and  circumspect,  so  wary  and  provident,  should  never 
until  the  very  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  have 
thought  of  insuring  their  houses  upon  land  against  the 
great  peril  of  fire,  from  which  they  were  suffering 
almost  daily  in  their  private  fortunes,  and  in  many 
instances  enormously.  I cannot  pretend  to  explain 
this  anomaly  with  anything  like  certainty.  It  will 
remain  an  anomaly  after  any  solution  that  has  occur- 
red to  me.  But  we  know  that  the  spirit  of  acquisition 


14 


is  more  vigilant  than  the  spirit  of  conservation  ; that 
when  men  are  intent  upon  the  gains  of  trade,  their 
eyes  never  close  until  they  have  looked  in  all  direc- 
tions for  the  dangers  that  may  assail  the  adventure, 
and  looked  up  if  possible  a protection  against  them 
all ; but  that  when  the  house  is  built,  and  placed  among 
the  things  that  are  thought  certain  and  assured  in  this 
world,  the  owner  goes  to  sleep  in  it,  and  awakes  only 
to  the  dangers  that  may  attend  further  gain.  This 
may  be  a very  unsatisfactory  reason  for  the  difference; 
but  if  it  does  not  answer,  I can  suggest  little  more, 
except  the  want  of  all  materials  to  estimate  the  pre- 
mium or  risk  of  fire  on  land  at  that  time  of  day,  while 
at  sea  there  were  the  materials  derived  from  the  long 
previous  practice  of  maritime  commerce. 

This  want  of  statistics  to  regulate  fire  insurance  pre- 
miums, may  account  in  part  for  its  not  being  intro- 
duced as  soon  even  as  it  was  thought  to  be  expedient, 
and  may  also  account  for  the  nature  of  the  first  asso- 
ciation for  this  purpose  that  I will  presently  mention 
to  you,  and  which  was  in  some  degree  independent  of 
statistics,  as  the  insurers  and  the  insured  were  the 
same  persons. 

Life  insurance^  as  we  now  understand  it,  was  no 
earlier  than  fire,  nor  indeed  so  early;  and  its  compara- 
tively recent  introduction  is  in  part  the  occasion  of 
like  surprise,  but  not  in  the  same  degree.  Considering 
its  great  convenience,  and  the  immense  resort  to  it  at 
this  day,  its  introduction  ought  to  have  been  coeval 
with  modern  civilization,  and  certainly  with  the  ear- 


15 


liestdays  of  modern  refinement;  but  elements  essential 
to  its  successful  introduction  did  not  then  exist.  In- 
surance of  persons^  assuming  the  perils  to  life,  was 
known  at  an  early  period  of  modern  commerce ; but  it 
was  used  as  a branch  of  marine  insurance,  to  provide 
for  the  case  of  death  during  a voyage,  or  for  the  ransom 
of  a captive  at  sea  in  the  Mediterranean,  or  on  the 
coast  of  Europe,  whose  fate,  if  unredeemed,  was  fre- 
quently death  or  slavery.  In  such  cases  the  risk  was 
principally  maritime,  and  was  probably  estimated  on 
much  the  same  principles  as  the  risk  of  maritime  ad- 
venture generally. 

The  contract  in  some  instances  no  doubt  was  used 
by  creditors  to  secure  such  debts  and  payments  as  were 
dependent  upon  the  lives  of  their  debtors;  but  the  true 
principles  of  the  contract  being  then  unknown,  it  was 
abused  to  such  a degree  that  it  became  the  general 
opinion  of  the  continent  that  life  insurance  was  against 
good  morals,  and  it  was  discouraged.  Finally,  the 
objections  to  it  became  complicated  with  religious  or 
superstitious  impressions,  that  what  was  the  gift  of 
God,  and  when  taken  away  was  His  resumption,  ought 
not  to  be  insured.  It  was  consequently  prohibited  by 
the  ordinances  of  Rotterdam,  Amsterdam,  Middleburg, 
Bilboa,  etc.,  except  as  a provision  for  ransom,  for  which 
some  of  them  permitted  it ; but  by  the  Ordinance  of 
Louis  XIV.,  in  1681,  it  was  prohibited  universally  to 
insure  the  life  of  anybody,  and  the  received  doctrine  in 
France  was,  that  such  a contract  was  against  the  law 
of  nature,  and  void. 


16 


It  seems  to  have  been  in  a great  degree  accidental, 
that  life  insurance  was  introduced  into  England  as 
soon  as  it  was.  Until  the  close  of  the  seventeenth 
century  there  were  no  materials  for  scientifically 
calculating  the  value  of  life  at  a certain  age,  the 
probability  of  its  future  duration,  or  its  continuance 
for  a particular  time.  The  doctrine  of  probabilities 
before  that  time  was  imperfectly  developed,  and  almost 
exclusively  in  regard  to  games  of  chance;  and  the  facts 
for  its  application  in  regard  to  life  had  not  been  suffi- 
ciently observed.  In  the  year  1693,  Dr.  Edmund 
Halley,  the  celebrated  mathematician  and  astronomer, 
to  renew  the  suspended  publication  of  the  memoirs  of 
the  Royal  Society,  of  which  he  was  assistant-secretary, 
undertook,  for  his  own  share  of  the  labour,  to  provide 
for  five  pages  in  twenty,  or  one-fourth  of  the  whole 
mass  that  for  several  years  from  its  institution,  in 
1660,  had  made  the  periodical  issue  of  the  society.  It 
has  been  thought  that  under  the  stimulus  of  this  com- 
pact, he  prepared  and  printed,  in  the  memoirs  of  the 
society,  a paper,  with  the  title  of  “An  Estimate  of  the 
Degrees  of  Mortality  of  Mankind,  drawn  from  the 
va^rious  Tables  of  the  Births  and  Funerals  of  the  City 
of  Breslau,  with  an  attempt  to  ascertain  the  price  of 
Annuities  upon  Lives.”  The  paper  was  founded  upon 
a statement  of  the  births,  deaths,  and  ages  of  the  per- 
sons dying  in  that  city  in  the  five  years  from  1687  to 
1691,  and  it  resulted  in  giving  what  is  called  a “Table 
of  Mortality and  it  is  remarked  in  the  work  from 
which  I get  my  information,  as  an  extraordinary  fact, 
that  the  public  might  have  availed  themselves  of  the 


f 


17 

benefits  of  Life  Assurance  in  1693,  upon  the  terms 
deduced  from  Dr.  Halley’s  table,  and  at  the  rate  of 
interest  then  current,  six  per  cent.,  as  safely  as  they 
can  now  grant  annuities,  or  insure  lives,  with  a reduced 
rate  of  mortality  deduced  from  the  Northampton  or 
Carlisle  tables,  and  especially  from  the  table  of  mortality 
of  males  deduced  by  the  Register  General  from  the  re- 
turns under  the  General  Registry  Act  of  1838,  at  the 
present  rate  of  interest,  three  per  cent.  How  long  the 
want  of  such  a table  would  have  postponed  the  grant- 
ing of  life  annuities,  or  the  making  of  life  insurances,  in 
England,  no  one  can  certainly  say,  nor  do  I mean  to 
say  that  this  table  was  followed  by  the  first  company 
afterwards  established,  though  it  is  still  followed  by  one 
of  the  life  insurance  companies  in  London ; but  the 
first  company  for  such  transactions  was  incorporated  in 
that  kingdom  in  1706,  and  not  before.  A mutual  in- 
surance company  to  indemnify  against  losses  by  fire 
happening  to  buildings,  preceded  the  life  insurance 
company  but  ten  years.  Upon  what  facts  it  established 
its  first  rates,  I have  been  unable  to  find.  If  it  had 
any,  it  had  more  than  some  of  us  now  have  in  this 
city.  It  had  no  capital,  as  far  as  I can  learn,  nor  any 
security  for  its  losses  except  its  own  premium&;  but  as 
it  was’ a company  for  mutual  assurance  only,  the  in- 
surers and  insured  being  embarked  in  one  bottom,  it 
was  as  safe  a mode  as  could  be  devised  of  beginning 
an  experiment.  It  planted  the  seed  from  which  the 
now  marvellous  tree  has  grown  up  in  England  and 
elsewhere. 


2 


18 


Mr.  Chairman,  I have  made  these  remarks  to  en- 
hance in  some  degree  the  merit  of  the  men  who  estab- 
lished this  institution  in  the  year  1752.  If  they  were 
not  the  first  to  introduce  insurances  against  loss  by 
fire  to  houses  and  buildings  anywhere,  they  were  the 
first  to  introduce  them  into  this  country.  After  some 
inquiry,  I am  satisfied  that  fire  insurance  was  not 
known  among  us  before  that  year.  Marine  insurance 
was  practised  here  as  early  as  1721;  for  a broker’s 
office  for  effecting  such  insurances  is  advertised  of  that 
date  in  a gazette  of  this  city;  but  policies  against  fire 
were  not  known.  The  earliest  incorporation  for  fire 
insurance  in  Boston  took  place  in  1795;  and  I am 
informed  that  private  policies  against  the  risk  were 
previously  unknovvui  there.  All  the  world  seem  to 
have  come  tardily  into  the  use  of  this  most  important 
security ; and  yet  the  risk  has  been  coeval  with  so- 
ciety. The  use  of  it  in  Paris,  precedes  us  but  half  a 
dozen  years ; and  in  regard  to  Holland,  with  whom 
our  early  relations  were  more  intimate  than  with  any 
other  people  of  the  Continent,  the  Hollanders  were 
not  only  not  before  us,  but  they  are,  I believe,  still 
behind  us,  and  behind  the  rest  of  the  world;  and 
they  have  positively  discouraged  the  practice,  under 
the  narrow  view  that  it  increases  the  negligence  of 
people  in  guarding  against  accidents  by  fire,  and  pro- 
* motes  incendiarism  and  fraud.  There  may  be,  and 
certainly  are  such  incidents  to  it;  but  how  small  the 
evil  of  them,  compared  with  the  immense  beneficence 
of  the  general  practice ! 


19 


And  how  and  by  whom  was  this  Company  formed  ? 
It  is  quite  interesting  to  know,  and  to  record  it.  It 
concerns  the  forefathers  of  our  city,  our  own  ancestors, 
and  will  give  an  agreeable  picture  of  their  wdsdorn  and 
efficiency.  The  particular  manner  is  as  well  known 
to  us  now  as  it  was  to  them  at  that  time.  The  prin- 
cipal actors  also  are  known.  The  special  agency  of 
each  in  the  transaction  may  to  some  extent  be  conjec- 
tured, from  the  tradition  of  their  characters  that  has 
come  to  us,  and  from  the  minutes  of  their  transactions, 
all  of  which  are  extant  from  the  first  meeting  to  the 
present  day.  But  although  I may  perhaps  name  the 
individual  who  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  leader  or 
founder  of  the  Institution,  the  claim  to  this  position 
can  be  asserted  only  on  conjectural  grounds. 

The  manner  was  very  simple  and  direct.  Two  or 
three  persons  of  activity,  no  doubt,  and  of  sufficient 
esteem  in  the  city,  caused  to  be  prepared  the  articles 
of  association  and  agreement,  creating  the  Company, 
and  declaring  the  terms  and  conditions  upon  which 
they  would  insure  the  houses  and  buildings  of  each 
other,  in  and  near  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  against  loss 
by  fire,  and  the  extent  and  limitation  of  the  liability 
of  the  association  for  the  loss.  These  articles  of  agree- 
ment they  called  A deed  of  settlement,  and  it  was  to 
be  signed  at  first  by  all  who  were  willing  to  insure  with 
the  Company ; and  after  the  first  election  of  Directors 
and  Treasurer,  who  were  to  be  chosen  annually  for 
the  government  of  the  Company,  by  all  who  should  in 
fact  insure  with  them.  We  have  it  now  before  us 


20 


engrossed  on  parchment.  All  who  are  now  present 
have  probably  signed  it.  All  ought  to  sign  it,  but  the 
ceremony  in  modern  times  has  not  been  universally 
performed. 

After  this  initial  paper  had  been  signed  with  such 
names,  and  to  such  an  extent  as  to  have  weight  and 
influence  with  the  inhabitants,  an  advertisement  was 
published  on  the  18th  of  February,  1752,  in  the  Penn- 
sylvania Qazette^  a weekly  newspaper,  published  by 
Benjamin  Franklin  and  David  Hall,  inviting  subscrip- 
tions generally.  This  was  its  tenor  : All  persons  in- 

clined to  subscribe  to  the  articles  of  insurance  of  houses 
from  Are,  in  and  near  the  city,  are  desired  to  appear 
at  the  Court  House,  where  attendance  will  be  given  to 
take  in  their  subscriptions  every  seventh  day  of  the 
week,  in  the  afternoon,  until  the  13th  of  April  next, 
being  the  day  appointed  by  the  said  articles  for  elect- 
ing twelve  Directors  and  a Treasurer.”  And  accord- 
ingly, on  the  13th  of  April,  1752,  the  second  Monday 
of  that  month,  the  subscribers  convened  at  the  Court 
House  and  elected  the  Directors  and  Treasurer  for  the 
current  year.  The  Company  was  thus  brought  into 
existence,  and  endued  with  capacity  to  perform  its  im- 
portant ofiice.  The  members  were  called  Contributors; 
and  it  was  named  in  the  deed  of  settlement,  even  be- 
fore its  birth.  The  Philadelphia  Contrihutionship  for  the 
Insurance  of  Houses  from  Loss  by  Fire. 

The  name  first  subscribed  to  this  deed  of  settlement 
is  that  of  James  Hamilton,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of 
the  Province  under  the  Proprietaries.  It  was  the  name 


21 


of  a public  officer,  announcing  the  approbation  and  fa- 
vour of  the  government,  but  indicating  no  special  par- 
ticipation in  originating  the  company.  The  first  private 
name  is  that  of  Benjamin  Franklin, — private  in  the 
unofficial  sense,  but  publicly  known  in  the  Colonies, 
and  thereafter  to  be  universally  known  among  men. 
His  name  stood  also  at  the  head  of  the  Directors  cho- 
sen at  the  first  election.  They  were  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin, William  Coleman,  Philip  Syng,  Samuel  Rhoads, 
Hugh  Roberts,  Israel  Pemberton,  Jr.,  John  Mifflin,  Jo- 
seph Morris,  Joseph  Fox,  Jonathan  Zane, William Grif- 
fitts,  and  Amos  Strettell ; a list  which  contains  names  of 
some  of  the  most  respected  citizens  of  Philadelphia, 
whose  descendants  are  still  among  us,  and  are  person- 
ally esteemed  and  honoured.  The  first  Treasurer  cho- 
sen for  the  same  period,  was  John  Smith;  and  among 
these  men  I think  we  are  to  look  for  the  originator  or 
introducer  of  this  plan  of  insurance. 

Most  persons,  strangers  to  our  city  particularly, 
would  be  inclined,  from  the  two  facts  I have  mentioned, 
his  being  the  first  to  sign  the  deed  ol  settlement,  and 
the  first  named  Director,  to  assign  the  first  motion  to 
Dr.  Franklin,  and  to  regard  him  as  what  is  now  called 
^Hhe  motive  power.”  He  was  a man  of  quick  percep- 
tion, great  sagacity,  remarkably  desirous  of  useful 
knowledge,  possessing  a vast  fund  of  it,  and  most  in- 
genious in  the  application  of  it.  His  mind  was  sug- 
gestive, and  he  was  skilful  and  indefatigable  in  mak- 
ing his  suggestions  popular  with  his  fellow-citizens. 
He  was  connected  with  so  many  useful  works  and 


22 


designs  in  Philadelphia,  that  the  merit  of  most  or  all 
of  them  during  his  time,  is  generally,  by  strangers  at 
least,  attributed  to  him;  and  his  apparent  leading  in 
this  Institution  would  seem  to  give  countenance  to 
such  a claim  in  the  present  instance.  But  the  nega- 
tive evidence  will  be  found  to  be  pretty  decidedly  the 
other  way. 

Dr.  Franklin  in  his  autobiography,  neither  claims 
the  merit,  nor  does  he  mention  the  Institution  ; while 
about  the  same  time  he  records  his  connexion  with  the 
Pennsylvania  Hospital,  the  Academy  and  Grammar 
School,  subsequently  the  College,  and  now  the  Univer- 
sity of  Pennsylvania,  and  the  first  design  of  paving  the 
city,  which  I think  he  says  was  his  own  suggestion, 
and  that  he  was  the  first  mover  in  the  plan,  though 
the  lighting  of  it  was,  as  he  also  records,  suggested  after 
his  departure  for  England  in  1757.  We  must  do  Dr. 
Franklin  the  justice  to  believe  that  he  never  claimed 
a merit  of  this  kind  that  did  not  belong  to  him.  He 
disclaimed  the  merit  of  originating  the  Pennsylvania 
Hospital,  because  it  did  not  belong  to  him ; and  the 
manner  in  which  he  makes  this  disclaimer  in  his  auto- 
biography, shows  the  reason  why  his  name  was  some- 
times used  to  promote  plans,  of  which  he  thought 
favourably,  although  he  was  in  no  manner  the  author 
of  them,  nor  perhaps  active  in  promoting  them. 

In  1751,”  says  this  delightful  biography,  Dr. 
Thomas  Bond,  a particular  friend  of  mine,  conceived 
the  idea  of  establishing  a hospital  in  Philadelphia  (a 
very  beneficent  design,  which  has  been  ascribed  to  me, 


23 


but  was  originally  and  truly  his),  for  the  reception 
and  cure  of  poor  sick  persons,  whether  inhabitants  of 
the  province  or  strangers.  He  was  zealous  and  active 
in  endeavouring  to  procure  subscriptions  for  it ; but 
the  proposal  being  a novelty  in  Pennsylvania,  and  at 
first  not  well  understood,  he  met  but  little  success. 
At  length  he  came  to  me  with  the  compliment  that 
he  found  there  was  no  such  a thing  as  carrying  a 
public-spirited  project  through  without  my  being  con- 
cerned in  it.  ‘■For,’  said  he,  ‘I  am  often  asked  by 
those  to  whom  I propose  subscribing,  have  you  con- 
sulted Franldin  on  this  business?  and  what  does  he 
thinh  of  it  ? and  when  I tell  them  that  I have  not, 
supposing  it  rather  out  of  your  line,  they  do  not  sub- 
scribe, but  say  they  loill  consider  itJ  I inquired  into 
the  nature  and  probable  utility  of  this  scheme,  and 
receiving  from  him  a very  satisfactory  explanation,  I 
not  only  subscribed  to  it  myself,  but  engaged  heartily 
in  the  design  of  procuring  subscriptions  from  others.” 
Dr.  Franklin’s  name  was  a sanction  for  this  under- 
taking as  well  as  for  that,  and  whosesoever  was  the  first 
thought,  his  was  the  adoption  and  recommendation  of 
it  as  a good  thought,  and  this  merit  must  undoubtedly 
be  accorded  to  him.  In  the  first  outset  of  the  Company 
he  gave  attendance  at  the  meetings  of  the  Directors, 
and  so  co-operated  with  them;  but  the  minutes  which 
the  office  now  possesses  from  the  beginning,  and  which 
have  been  always  kept  with  great  distinctness,  furnish 
no  traces  of  his  particular  action  in  its  concerns.  After 
his  re-election,  in  1753,  he  attended  more  rarely,  and 


24 


must  have  been  a pretty  large  contributor  to  the  fund 
of  absentee  lines;  and  he  ceased  to  be  a Director  after 
the  close  of  the  second  year. 

Instead  of  this  distinctive  name  as  the  author  of  the 
plan,  there  seems  to  be  at  least  as  much  reason  for 
attributing  it  to  a gentleman,  who,  from  the  extraordi- 
nary increase  of  his  denomination  in  modern  times, 
would  now  be  considered  as  having  no  name  at  all — 
JoJin  Smith.  He  was,  however,  as  is  still  well  known, 
and  almost  remembered,  a man  of  property,  who  took 
an  active  part  in  the  institution  and  promotion  of  other 
establishments  for  the  benefit  of  the  city,  a merchant, 
occupying  a large  and  well* furnished  brick  house  in  a 
quarter  of  the  city  where  the  most  affluent  families 
had  their  residence  at  the  time,  and  who  from  his  pro- 
fession was  likely  to  be  acquainted  with  the  usage  of 
insurance  against  maritime  risks,  and  in  frequent  con- 
nexion with  the  mother  country,  where  fire  insurance 
was  practised.  He  was  the  first  Treasurer  of  the  Com- 
pany, the  responsible  depositary  of  the  funds,  the  un- 
paid agent  for  several  successive  years  in  the  receipt, 
disbursement,  and  investment,  of  the  deposits  or  pre- 
miums. He  was  the  main  executive  officer;  and  until 
after  the  Company  was  thoroughly  set  agoing,  he  did 
not  retire  from  its  service,  and  then  he  carried  with 
him  the  thanks  of  the  Directors.  He  was  also  the  first 
person  who  insured  with  the  Company,  to  give  it  a 
start,  and  made  a second  insurance  in  advance  of  any 
other  person.  The  surveys  of  his  two  brick  houses, 
three  stories  high,  are  No.  1 and  2,  of  the  first  of  June, 


25 


1752.  The  originals  are  now  in  the  office,  and  I will 
read  No.  1 as  a formula  of  the  early  surveys. 

''Surveyed  June  1st,  1752. 

At  the  request  of  John  Smith,  Merchant,  his  dwelling-house 
on  the  east  side  of  King  Street,  between  Mulberry  and  Sassa- 
fras, 30  feet  front,  40  feet  deep,  brick,  9 inch  party  walls,  3 
Storys  in  height,  plaistered  partitions, 


We  judge  the  above  house  and  kitchen  to  be  worth  £1000. 


£500.  (a  20  s.  per  ct.) 

The  dwelling-house  of  John  Smith,  you  see,  was  a 
considerable  house  for  any  time  ofday,  and  especially  at 
that  time ; and  King  Street  was,  in  1752,  a fashionable 
street  with  a loyal  name.  The  King’s  name  was  then 
in  the  mouths  of  all  the  people.  It  was  a tower  of 
strength.  But  the  “gentry”  have  disappeared  from 
the  street,  and  the  name  of  the  street  has  disappeared, 
and  the  strength  of  the  name  has  ceased  among  us, 
and  it  is  now  diluted  to  Water.  If  the  authorship  ot 
a scheme  is  to  be  inferred  from  readiness  to  bear  its 
heaviest  burden,  from  constancy  in  bearing  it,  and 
from  priority  in  professing  and  proving  his  confidence 


open -Newel  bracket  stairs, 
penthouses  with  board  ceilings, 
garrets  finished,  3 storys,  painted 
brick  kitchen,  2 storys  in  height. 


dresser,  shelves,  wainscot  closet  fronts. 
Shingling  I worn. 


15  ft.  9 front,  19  ft.  6 deep. 


Jos.  Fox, 

Samuel  Khoads. 


26 


in  its  working,  John  Smith,  the  nameless,  has  better 
pretensions  to  that  merit,  than  some  of  the  more  indi- 
viduated names  in  the  Company.  His  descendants  I 
believe  are  among  us,  and  are  in  great  esteem.  But 
who  shall  declare  the  generation  of  the  Smiths,  and 
especially  of  the  John  Smiths?* 

Mr.  Chairman,  the  contributors  now  know  as  much 
of  the  first  adtors  in  the  Company,  as  I do,  and  the 
records  tell  no  more.  Its  actions,  as  they  appear  in 
the  Minute  Book,  were  plain,  sensible,  and  direct,  very 
practical,  very  simple,  recorded  in  few  words,  and  fol- 
lowed out  with  great  constancy  and  perseverance, 
through  evil  and  good  report;  for,  no  doubt,  there  was 
of  both  kinds,  and  the  Minutes  furnish  some  evidence 
even  of  the  latter ; for  many  fell  off  at  the  expiration 
of  the  first  seven  years,  and  symptoms  of  dissatisfaction 
appeared  in  some  instances  before  the  close  of  that 
period.  But  the  directors  persevered  with  faithfulness, 
and  they  should  have  the  praise  of  it. 

At  that  day,  the  virtue  of  punctuality  was  esteemed 
at  least  as  highly  as  it  is  now;  but  both  then  and  now, 
appliances  of  some  kind  were,  and  still  are,  neces- 
sary to  secure  it.  Punctuality  at  the  monthly  and 
other  meetings  of  the  directors,  was  at  that  time  secured 

* Since  these  remarks  were  made,  I have  learned  from  the  grand- 
son of  this  gentleman,  John  Jay  Smith,  Esq.,  the  Treasurer  of 
the  Philadelphia  Library  Company,  that  the  prominency  or  leading 
interest  in  the  concern,  which  upon  probabilities,  I had  attributed 
to  his  ancestor,  is  proved  by  an  original  journal  and  others  papers 
still  in  possession  of  his  descendants. 


27 


or  promoted  by  a fine  upon  the  absentees,  two  shillings 
upon  the  director  who  did  not  attend  at  all,  and  half 
that  sum  upon  him  who  was  absent  at  the  appointed 
hour  of  meeting.  A remembrancer  of  a different  kind 
has  been  substituted  in  modern  times.  In  London,  I 
believe,  the  modern  expedient  in  similar  cases.  Life 
Insurance  Companies  in  particular,  is  to  pay  a guinea 
to  those  who  give  full  attendance.  Our  fashion  here, 
is  to  give  at  the  monthly  meeting,  a reasonably  good 
dinner  and  a segar.  The  other  meetings,  which  in 
the  form  of  committees,  are  frequent  and  almost  daily, 
are  performed  fasting.  But  while  we  know  how  this 
remembrancer  is  disposed  of  by  us,  and  may  conjec- 
ture how  the  London  guinea  or  sovereign  is  disposed 
of,  what  do  you  suppose  was  the  use  to  which  our  fore- 
fathers applied  that  fund  of  treasury  fines  which  was 
accumulated  by  the  defaults  of  the  Directors?  I will 
give  you  any  time  you  please  to  guess, — either  the 
thing  itself,  or  the  species.^  or  even  the  genus  of  it.  It 
had  no  relation  to  burning  or  to  building,  to  eating  or  to 
drinking.  It  was  the  reverse  of  bread  to  the  poor  and 
it  conveyed  neither  pleasure  nor  instruction  to  the 
young,  nor  indeed  to  any  one  who  minded  his  own 
business  and  stayed  at  home,  as  I dare  say  the  Directors 
themselves  did.  But  it  was  a public-spirited  use,  and 
in  the  true  utilitarian  temper  of  the  day,  and  was  of 
unspeakable  comfort  at  times  to  the  weary  wayfarer, 
especially  when  the  roads  were  founderous,and  the  only 
comfort  on  the  way  was  to  know  how  much  you  had 
ploughed  of  the  journey,  and  how  little  of  it  remained 
to  be  ploughed.  They  invested  their  exchequer  in 


28 


milestones^  numbered  consecutively,  and  planted  them 
from  the  intersection  of  Front  and  High  Streets  to  the. 
river’s  edge  opposite  Trenton,  in  New  Jersey;  and  hav- 
ing gained  in  accurate  measurement  hy  the  Surveyor- 
General  of  the  Province,  two  miles  in  the  estimated 
distance,  they  planted  the  stone  numbered  29  miles 
from  Philadelphia,  at  the  distance  of  four  chains  from 
the  edge  of  the  Delaware,  and  gave  the  two  supernu- 
merary stones  which  they  had  provided,  to  somebody 
else,  to  prosecute  the  good  work  further  on.  This 
work  was  begun  by  a Committee  of  the  Directors  at  5 
A.M.  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  of  May,  1764,  and  it 
was  reported  on  the  17th  of  the  same  month  to  the  Com- 
pany as  completed.  In  a subsequent  year,  when  the 

■ 

treasury  had  again  become  raised  up  by  means  of  the 
same  vacuum  in  attendance,  they  pursued  the  like  work 
towards  the  boundary  of  the  province  in  the  direction 
southward  towards  New  Castle,  Delaware.  The  bless- 
ing of  the  traveller  upon  him  who  first  invented  mile- 
stones, certainly  did  not  fall  upon  them ; but  theirs 
was  the  first  application  of  the  invention  in  this  quarter 
of  the  world,  and  deserves  at  least  half  of  the  blessing. 

I have  little  more  to  say  of  their  minutes.  The 
more  profitable  reference  on  the  present  occasion  is  to 
the  principles  of  the  association  at  its  outset,  and  their 
subsequent  modification  in  an  important  point,  the 
progress  of  their  insurances  afterwards,  and  the  present 
state  of  them  in  point  of  security,  both  positively  and 
in  comparison  with  the  body  of  fire  insurances  in  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  I shall  make  no  comparison  with 
any  existing  fire  insurance  company  in  our  own  country. 


29 


But  as  a matter  connected  with  the  parentage  of  this 
Company,  and  the  discovery  of  the  original  or  exem- 
plar in  another  country  from  which  this  design  was 
taken,  I must  advert  to  another  entry  in  the  Minute 
Book,  which  in  this  relation  is  worthy  of  notice. 

The  Directors,  though  the  society  was  not  incorpo- 
rated in  1752,  nor  until  the  year  1768,  established  a 
seal  to  be  affixed  to  the  policies,  at  their  first  meeting 
after  the  first  election.  The  common  synonym  of  the 
Company,  the  Hand-in-Hand^  so  well  known  to  all  of 
us,  and  to  the  city  generally,  is  not,  it  may  be  observed, 
contained  in  any  part  of  the  deed  of  settlement^  nor  in 
the  policy,  nor  as  far  as  I have  been  able  to  ascertain  in 
any  of  its  minute  books  or  papers.  Yet  the  thought 
of  that  name  was  present  to  the  first  Directors  and 
Treasurer;  and  the  device  of  the  seal  established  as 
the  first  act  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  Board,  was 
four  hands  united^  with  the  motto,  Philadelphia  Con- 
trihutionsliipr  The  Directors  also  established  the 
hadpe^  as  we  have  since  called  it,  or  as  it  was  then 
called,  the  ^^marh''  of  the  Company;  the  same  four 
hands  united  in  metal,  upon  a shield  of  wood,  which 
they  thought  it  material  to  the  safety  of  the  Company 
to  put  up  on  the  front  of  the  building  insured,  possibly 
because  in  their  opinion  there  would  then  be  a know- 
ledge that  it  was  insured  by  the  Company,  and  the 
efforts  of  the  contributors  and  their  friends  would  be 
more  strenuously  directed  to  save  it.  A different  state 
of  things  has  induced  the  doubt  in  our  times,  whether 
the  appearance  of  the  badge  has  not  led  at  least  on 
some  occasions  to  an  opposite  result,  and  the  use  of  it 


30 


is  now  discontinued.  The  seal,  however,  with  its  old 
device  remains,  and  it  is  now  the  seal  of  the  corpora- 
tion. 

The  original  principles  of  this  Company,  Mr.  Chair- 
man, were  these. 

1.  The  policy  of  insurance  was  for  seven  years. 

2.  The  premium  was  neither  a rate  payable  annu- 
ally, nor  for  the  entire  term  of  seven  }^ears,  but  was 
the  deposit  of  a sum,  the  use  or  interest  of  which  dur- 
ing the  policy  belonged  to  the  company,  and  so  it  con- 
tinues to  this  day. 

3.  The  risk  of  all  fires  was  assumed,  without  any 
exception  of  public  enemies,  military  or  usurped  power, 
rebellion,  civil  commotion  or  riot;  and  so  it  continues. 

4.  The  property  insured  was  protected  during  the 
term  against  any  number  of  losses  not  total,  without 
reducing  the  amount  insured  on  the  premises,  or  im- 
pairing the  deposit.  In  case  of  destruction  from  the 
first  floor  upwards  at  any  time,  the  Company  had  an 
option  to  pay  the  whole  insurance,  and  so  end  the 
policy  ; or  to  rebuild,  the  policy  continuing  in  force  ; 
and  how  often  soever  the  destruction  by  fire,  and  the 
rebuilding  might  take  place  during  the  term,  the  policy 
continued  in  force,  a.nd  the  deposit  unimpaired.  And 
so  it  continues. 

5.  The  payment  of  the  deposit,  the  acceptance  of  the 
policy,  and  the  signature  of  the  deed  of  settlement, 
made  the  assured  a member  of  the  Company,  and  a 
party  to  all  the  articles  in  the  deed.  And  so  it  is  to 
this  day,  the  signature  to  the  deed  being  sometimes 
neglected,  as  the  other  acts  are  of  equal  efiicacy. 


31 


6.  The  personal  liability  of  the  members  for  losses, 
beyond  their  own  deposits,  was  half  as  much  more,  in 
case  a single  fire,  beginning  in  one  house  and  damag- 
ing one  or  more  houses,  should  sweep  away  all  the 
funds  of  the  Company. 

7.  The  concern  was  managed  for  the  profit  and  loss 
of  the  members,  interest  being  allowed  to  them  on  their 
deposits,  in  proportion  to  the  whole  amount  received 
by  the  Company,  and  a proportion  of  the  losses  and 
expenses  charged  to  them,  and  the  balance  settled  at 
the  expiration  of  the  policy. 

8.  Executors,  administrators,  and  assigns  were  in- 
cluded as  members,  there  being  a provision  for  notice 
of  transfer  and  assignment  within  a limited  time,  and 
the  approbation  of  the  Directors.  It  is  so  at  this  day. 

The  modifications  since  made  of  some  of  these  prin- 
ciples are  these  : 

1.  The  policy  is  now  perpetual,  with  liberty  to 
determine  it  on  either  side,  on  certain  terms. 

2.  The  feature  of  personal  liability  in  any  event 
beyond  the  deposit  money  is  obliterated. 

3.  The  profit  and  loss  principle  was  expunged  at 
an  early  day ; and  it  will  interest  you  to  learn  the 
effect  of  this  principle  while  it  operated,  and  the  de- 
velopment of  business  that  instantly  followed  the 
resolution  of  the  Company  abolishing  it. 

While  the  principle  was  in  force,  the  Company  was 
in  effect  a dividend-paying  company,  the  dividend  be- 
ing apportioned  and  paid  periodically,  and  there  being 
no  capital  nor  security  for  losses  beyond  the  actual 
deposits  and  the  interest  not  divided,  except  the  guar- 


aiity  in  one  event  of  a further  payment  of  fifty  per 
cent,  of  each  member  s deposit.  It  was  a cardinal  de- 
fect in  the  scheme.  Under  such  a principle,  I do  not 
see  how  the  Company  could  become  extensively  useful. 

The  effect  of  it  in  the  first  ten  years  of  the  Company 
was  this  : the  amount  of  their  policies  at  the  end  of 
the  first  year,  namely,  25th  of  March,  1753,  was 
$108,360;  and  the  amount  of  their  deposits, $1261  93. 
At  the  expiration  often  years,  namely,  in  March,  1763, 
the  sum  insured  for  that  year  was,  $67,773 ; and  the 
deposits$982  25.  There  was  a falling  off  of  nearly  two- 
fifths  at  the  end  of  ten  years.  Many  did  not  renew 
their  policies  at  the  end  of  the  term.  The  minutes 
show  the  fact,  and  the  efforts  of  the  Directors  to  coun- 
teract it.  New  business  did  not  come  in.  Reflect- 
ing men  must  have  seen  the  defect,  and  declined  the 
security.  Others,  perhaps,  thought  the  whole  affair  a 
small  one.  With  an  almost  entire  ignorance  of  the 
average  risks  of  fire  in  the  city,  and  of  the  proper  rates 
of  premium  to  be  charged  for  insuring  against  them,  it 
seems  to  be  remarkable  that  they  did  not  perceive  at 
the  outset  both  the  benefit  and  the  necessity  of  accu- 
mulation, to  give  the  Company  anything  like  stability 
— anything  deserving  the  name  of  security  against  the 
variations  of  loss  from  time  to  time,  which  all  perceive, 
though  the  general  ratio  is  even  now  for  the  most  part 
unobserved,  or  but  partially  known.  I am  inclined  to 
think  that  the  Company  at  first  was  misled  by  a foreign 
example,  perhaps  not  perfectly  understood,  perhaps 
successful  against  all  previous  probabilities.  It  is  quite 
remarkable,  indeed,  that  the  Company  should  have 


33 


gone  on  for  even  these  ten  years  without  an  admoni- 
tion, that  the  profit  on  the  deposits  could  not  be  di- 
vided at  any  time,  without  a large  reservation  for  un- 
determined contingencies.  It  seems  as  if  a loss  of  a 
few  thousand  dollars  could  not  have  occurred  in  the 
whole  period,  without  sweeping  away  the  deposit  fund, 
and  breaking  up  the  Company.  It  is  nevertheless 
true,  that  the  interest  upon  the  deposits  did  pay  the 
losses  and  expenses,  and  leave  a dividend  to  the  de- 
positors whose  policies  from  time  to  time  expired. 
The  facts  say  something  perhaps  in  favour  of  the 
general  carefulness,  sobriety,  and  good  order,  of  our 
city  at  that  early  time,  and  for  the  then  common  union 
of  all  the  able-bodied  inhabitants  at  fires,  guided  by 
men  of  known  energy  and  character,  at  a day  when 
such  men  took  the  lead  with  general  consent,  and  com- 
pensated for  many  defects  both  in  the  apparatus  and 
the  supply  of  water.  But  all  subsequent  experience 
seems  to  be  against  fire  insurance  companies  upon  such 
a principle,  as  it  is  also  against  such  companies  as 
approach  it  in  practice,  while  they  have  a better 
principle  in  their  constitutions. 

At  the  general  meeting  in  April,  1763,  the  members 
unanimously  expunged  this  provision  from  their  deed 
of  settlement,  and  substituted  two  cardinal  provisions 
in  its  place.  I.  ^*That  the  interest  arising  from  the 
stock,  should  be  carried  to  one  common  account,  to 
answer  the  contingent  charges  of  the  Company,  and 
all  losses  and  damages  that  might  happen  to  the  same.” 
2.  ‘‘  That  no  part  of  the  deposit  money  should  be  ex- 

3 


34 


pended  in  repairing  or  paying  for  any  damage  done  by 
fire,  until  the  balance  of  the  interest  money,  as  shall 
accrue  to  the  time  of  such  fire,  shall  be  first  expended.” 
The  change  seems  to  have  been  recommended  by 
the  Directors,  upon  the  ground  mainly  of  convenience, 
to  avoid  the  necessity  of  troublesome  calculations  of 
dividends  of  profit  upon  the  expiring  policies ; a suffi- 
cient reason,  perhaps,  to  be  assigned  at  the  general 
meeting.  But  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the 
members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  did  not  perceive  by 
the  condition  of  the  Company,  as  well  as  by  the  con- 
sideration of  general  principles,  a far  weightier  reason 
in  the  necessity  of  giving  tone  to  a languishing  body, 
so  as  finally  to  endue  it  with  strength  to  meet  all  pro- 
bable hazards  in  reserve  for  it.  I have  no  doubt  that 
the  last  was  their  ruling  motive  and  object,  and  I de- 
sire to  give  them  credit  for  it.  It  was  a great  thought. 
So  far  as  I can  discover  from  the  constitution  of  a pri- 
mitive mutual  assurance  fire  company  elsewhere,  it  was 
an  original  thought;  and  it  was  undoubtedly  a thought 
as  full  of  good-will  towards  the  distant  future,  as  it 
was  of  precaution  for  the  time  near  at  hand, — for  those 
who  might  at  any  subsequent  day  seek  the  security, 
as  well  as  for  those  who  had  then  availed  themselves 
of  it.  It  has  been  the  building  up  of  the  Company  to 
its  present  adult  strength  and  solidity. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I shall  have  occasion  to  make  a few 
remarks  presently  upon  the  defective  state  of  our  know- 
ledge in  regard  to  the  facts  that  ought  to  govern  us  in 
estimating  the  risk  of  loss  by  fire,  and  the  proper  rates 


35 


of  premiums  of  fire  insurance.  The  facts  are  neces- 
sarily of  great  complication  and  variety.  Some  of  the 
causes  of  loss  by  fire  may  be  regarded  as  of  nearly  con- 
stant or  permanent  occurrence  and  operation,  and  can 
hardly  be  guarded  against;  some  of  them  are  occa- 
sional, almost  strictly  occasional,  operating  in  one  state 
of  things,  and  ceasing  to  operate  in  another  state  of 
things,  which  we  are  able  to  explain  and  provide  for. 
I speak  of  losses  by  fire.  Some  of  those  wdiich  we  must 
regard  as  of  permanent  operation,  appear  at  particular 
times  and  in  particular  places  to  become  dormant,  to 
sleep,  to  be  as  it  were  extinct ; while  at  the  same  time 
in  other  places,  and  at  other  times  in  the  same  places, 
they  operate  with  regular  energy  and  force. 

Looking  casually  at  the  risk  of  fire  to  houses  and 
merchandise,  either  as  to  its  happening  at  all,  or  as  to 
the  extent  of  injury  when  it  does  happen,  an  unin- 
structed  observer  might  be  disposed  to  say  that  there 
is  no  rule  about  it;  it  is  a matter  of  mere  chance;  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  estimating  the  risk  of  fire  in  such 
a city  as  Philadelphia,  and  particularly  the  extent  of 
loss  by  fire.  A fire  happens  one  day,  and  it  does  not 
happen  the  next.  The  element  sleeps  one  month,  and 
rages  another.  It  desolates  the  city  in  one  year,  and 
is  moderate  and  governable  for  some  years  afterwards. 
It  destroys  one  house,  or  a dozen  ; it  half  destroys  an- 
other house,  or  another  dozen ; and  it  scorches  or 
slightly  burns  one  or  a dozen,  or  fifty  others.  The  facts 
are  so.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  Partially  ob- 
served, they  appear  to  sustain  the  objection  that  it  is  all 


36 


chance^  and  that  there  is  no  rule  about  it.  But  philo- 
sophically speaking,  there  is  no  chance  in  the  matter. 
There  may  be  what  are  called  chances  of  its  being  so, 
and  not  otherwise;  but  chances  resolve  themselves 
to  the  observer,  after  long,  extensive,  and  accurate 
observation,  into  what  are  called  'probabilities;  and  as 
effects  follow  their  causes,  if  the  same  causes  remain, 
the  same  effects  will  follow,  and  at  length  a rule  may 
be  deduced  from  a great  mass  of  observations,  that  de- 
serves the  name  and  gives  the  assurance  of  great  or 
high  probability,  that  a certain  or  nearly  certain  pro- 
portion of  fires  will  happen  in  such  a city,  in  a year 
or  other  given  time,  and  that  a certain  proportion  of 
losses,  total,  severe,  or  slight,  will  happen  in  a given 
time,  a week,  a year,  or  a century;  and  the  average  of 
the  whole  may  be  practically  ascertained,  near  enough 
for  the  adjustment  of  premiums  upon  the  whole  city, 
if  the  whole  is  insured,  or  by  a proper  calculation  of 
probabilities,  for  a portion  of  the  city,  if  a portion  be 
insured. 

But  who  had  made  this  mass  of  observations  in 
the  early  days  of  this  Company  ? Who  among  us  has 
made  them  now,  after  the  lapse  of  a century  ? The 
experience  of  many  years  in  a single  company  may 
undoubtedly  be  something,  but  if  we  advert  to  the 
experience  of  past  days,  and  especially  to  the  expe- 
rience of  this  present  day  of  dividends  pretermitted, 
of  undisclosed  encroachments  upon  capital,  and  of  un- 
known proportions  between  amounts  insured,  and  of 
capitals  or  reservations  to  protect  them,  we  should  say 


37 


it  does  not  amount  to  much.  If  all  the  companies 
were  to  club  all  their  experience,  and  give  it  to  the 
public,  it  might  amount  to  more : but  I am  not  sure 
that  the  aggregate  would  be  worthy  of  entire  reliance. 
The  best  experience  we  have  is  limited  in  point  of 
time.  It  is  also  limited  in  point  of  range.  I will  give 
my  reason  for  thinking  so  presently.  One  thing,  how- 
ever, is  certain.  If  it  is  not  more  certain  philosophi- 
cally in  the  case  of  a company  taking  long  risks,  than  it 
is  in  the  case  of  every  insurance  company,  constantly, 
from  year  to  year,  or  month  to  month,  taking  short  risks, 
it  is  at  least  more  apparently  certain  in  the  case  of  such 
a company  as  this,  which  makes  only  permanent  or 
perpetual  insurances  upon  brick  and  stone  buildings. 
And  that  certain  thing  is  this,  that  nothing  but  long- 
extended  and  accurate  observation  of  losses  by  fire 
will  answer  for  such  a company  as  this.  One  with  an- 
other, the  policy  remains  upon  the  building  for  the 
whole  term  of  its  existence.  We  insure  it,  as  it  were, 
for  the  life  of  the  house,  from  seventy-five  to  a hundred 
years,  more  or  less ; and  we  take  the  risk  of  fire  to 
that  house,  and  of  consequent  loss,  for  the  whole  of 
that  time.  And  so  we  do  of  all  the  houses  we  insure. 
Surely  to  do  that  with  safety  to  the  Company,  we 
should  be  able  to  estimate  the  probability  of  loss,  not 
from  the  occurrence  of  a few  years,  but  of  a great  many, 
of  a century  even ; from  such  a term,  in  fine,  as  will 
give  us  a near  approach  to  the  law  of  this  species  of 
disaster  for  the  whole  time.  And  at  present,  if  we  are  at 
all  approaching  it,  we  are  still,  I think,  a great  way 


38 


off  from  it,  and  nearly  if  not  quite  as  far  as  our  fore- 
fathers were,  to  our  shame  be  it  spoken.  And  in  this 
state  of  our  knowledge,  the  thing  that  was  the  best  for 
them  to  do,  was  what  they  did,  and  what  we  do  at 
present,  and  it  is  still  the  best  that  can  be  done  ?jy  us, 
namely,  to  regard  our  premiums  of  insurance  as  in- 
cluding no  profit  at  all,  but  as  requiring  constant  accu- 
mulation to  meet  the  unknown  hazards  of  the  time  to 
come,  and  which  I fear  are  increasing  among  us  from 
day  to  day.  We  may  be  wrong,  and  if  we  are,  we  are 
wrong  on  the  right  side.  Those  who  have  already  de- 
clared their  profits,  their  estimated  profits,  and  paid 
them  away  without  large  reservations  for  the  future, 
may  be,  and  indeed  some  of  them  have  already  been, 
wrong  on  the  wrong  side.  I do  not  say  that  there  is 
one  rule  for  us,  and  another  for  them.  I think  there 
is  not.  But  I know  from  observation  in  this  Company, 
of  which  I became  a Director  in  1817,  and  have  con- 
stantly been  so  for  the  last  twenty-one  years,  that 
there  is  a rule  for  us,  which  for  a long  time  to  come 
will  be  the  only  rule  for  us,  that  is  to  say,  the  rule  of 
accumulation  without  dividends.  The  analogous  rule 
in  companies  that  insure  for  profit  at  the  present  rates, 
would  be  the  rule  of  very  small  dividends  of  profit,  and 
large  reservations  for  the  unknown  future,  until  the 
true  rule  shall  be  better  known.  For,  there  are  great 
calamities  by  fire,  rarely  occurring,  as  well  as  less 
calamities  frequently  occurring.  There  are  years  that 
may  be  called  as  in  life-risks,  years  of  plague  and 
cholera,  as  well  as  years  of  usual  or  ordinary  death ; 


39 


and  such  devastating  or  mortal  years,  concern  the 
insurers  against  loss  by  fire,  even  more  than  they 
appear  to  concern  insurers  of  life,  who  rarely  assume 
the  risk  of  life  in  the  class  particularly  exposed  to 
plague  and  cholera.  Fire  knows  no  distinction  of  sub- 
jects, and  houses  cannot  move  away  from  it.  Such 
calamities  come,  it  is  true,  at  more  distant  intervals; 
but  still  they  come.  A century,  and  even  a shorter 
period,  is  the  witness  of* them;  and  the  duty  of  those 
who  insure,  and  mean  to  keep  insuring  to  all  future 
time,  is  in  some  manner  to  provide  for  them;  and  with 
no  knowledge  at  present  that  enables  us  to  say  with 
demonstrable  probability,  what  these  disasters  will  be, 
or  when  they  may  be  expected,  the  law  of  our  institu- 
tion does  the  best  that  can  be  done,  by  separating  our 
concern  from  the  hope  of  gain,  and  from  its  one-sided 
speculations  and  estimates,  and  by  enlarging  our  secu- 
rity to  the  utmost  against  the  worst  that  may  happen. 
If  our  successors  shall  at  the  end  of  another  century 
find  they  have  too  much,  it  will  only  prove  that  the 
premiums,  assisted  by  the  accumulations  which  the 
deed  of  settlement  requires,  have  been  unnecessarily 
high,  and  the  strength  of  the  Company  will  then  be- 
come a public  benefaction  to  the  whole  city  and  its 
neighbourhood,  in  the  reduction  of  rates  of  premium 
upon  brick  and  stone  buildings.  But  let  me  state  two 
very  striking  facts  in  our  history,  to  illustrate  the  de- 
gree of  caution  with  which  we  should  receive  calcula- 
tions as  to  the  future,  with  our  present  knowledge. 
One  of  them,  is  that  at  the  end  of  this  present  fiscal 


40 


year  of  our  Company,  1852,  we  have,  with  a very  in- 
considerable fraction  of  excess,  the  same  proportion  of 
funds  to  the  whole  mass  of  insurances  that  we  had  at 
the  endof  the  fiscal  year,  1842, ten  years  ago,notwith- 
standing  the  intermediate  accumulation.  And  the 
other  is  that,  if  the  great  fire  of  1850  had  occurred  in 
the  year  1808,  it  would  have  swept  away  the  whole 
amount  of  our  funds,  deposits,  and  accumulations  for 
half  a century.  Our  insurances  in  the  quarter  where 
that  fire  occurred,  are  supposed  to  have  been  of  the 
same  amount  or  nearly  so  in  1808,  as  in  the  year  1850. 
The  two  mutual  assurance  companies  of  this  city  who 
covered  at  an  early  day  that  old  quarter,  as  1 may  call 
it,  bore  the  brunt  of  that  storm ; and  as  it  was  to  come, 
it  was  well  for  us  that  it  came  no  sooner. 

So  much,  Mr.  Chairman,  for  the  great  principle  of 
mutual  insurance  with  accumulation  of  the  premiums, 
adopted  by  this  Company  in  1763.  Every  one  must 
have  his  preferences;  but  for  perpetual  insurance  of 
houses,  1 decidedly  prefer  this  principle,  not  because  it 
is  certainly  necessary  to  security,  but  because  1 see 
nothing  that  can  be  proved  to  be  equally  secure. 

The  progress  of  the  Company  has  been  from  that 
time  onward,  with  occasional  exceptions  of  disastrous 
years ; and  after  examination  of  our  books,  we  do 
not  concur  in  opinion  with  a very  estimable  and  re- 
spectable annalist  of  our  city,  that  there  ever  was  a 
period  when  a loss  of  any  extent  disturbed  the  finances 
of  the  Company.  In  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  and 
in  the  latter  days  of  paper  money,  when  the  invest- 


41 


merits  were  upon  mortgage,  as  they  still  are  for  the 
most  part,  and  when  to  exact  immediate  payment, 
was  to  get  paper  worth  one  in  fifty,  or  less,  the  Com- 
pany may  have  had  to  proceed  cautiously,  to  avoid 
paying  a loss  in  the  same  paper;  but  except  in  such  a 
case,  the  prompt  payment  of  a loss  cannot  have  dis- 
turbed them  even  in  their  infancy.  Their  advance 
was  immediate  after  the  rule  of  1763;  and  the  in- 
surances continued  to  increase  from  year  to  year  after- 
wards, to  the  present  time.  The  public  appear  to  have 
understood  the  value  of  the  change. 

The  rates  of  insurance  in  that  early  day  varied  con- 
siderably from  the  present.  The  Company  insured 
brick  and  stone  houses  in  good  positions,  for  twenty 
shillings  in  the  hundred  pounds,  that  is  to  say,  upon  a 
deposit  of  one  per  cent.,  the  party  insured  retaining 
the  right  to  a return  of  that  deposit  on  the  expiration 
of  the  policy,  if  the  general  losses  did  not  exceed  the 
interest,  and  the  Company  enjoying  as  the  premium  of 
insurance,  only  the  use  or  interest  of  the  deposit  to  go 
into  account  against  the  losses  and  expenses  for  the 
proportional  benefit  of  all  the  members.  At  the  legal 
rate  of  interest  in  the  Colony,  six  per  centum,  this  was 
equivalent  to  an  annual  deposit  of  one  shilling  and 
two  pence  farthing  on  the  hundred  pounds,  or  six  cents 
on  the  hundred  dollars.  In  some  instances  they  in- 
sured for  as  low  a deposit  as  seventeen  shillings  and 
sixpence  on  the  hundred  pounds.  They  insured  brick 
houses  with  a joiner’s  or  cabinet-maker’s  workshop  in 
them,  at  two  per  cent.  For  good  risks  they  rarely  ex- 


42 


ceeded  twenty-five  and  thirty  shillings,  that  is  to  say, 
li  to  per  cent,  deposit.  Until  the  deed  of  settle- 
ment was  so  altered  in  April,  1769,  as  to  prohibit  in- 
surances on  wooden  buildings,  they  insured  even  such 
buildings  upon  a deposit  of  three  per  cent.  It  strikes 
me  the  more  as  remarkable,  because  I find  that  in  the 
first  English  insurance  company,  in  1696,  when  the 
rate  of  interest  in  England  was  the  same,  namely,  six 
per  cent.,  the  lowest  rate  of  premium  upon  the  least 
hazardous  buildings,  was  an  annual  premium  of  two 
shillings  in  the  hundred  pounds.  How  subsequent  ex- 
perience has  modified  this  rate  in  London,  I am  un- 
able to  say;  but  I find  one  recorded  instance  of  in- 
surance of  a house,  perhaps  of  the  second  class,  in  1739, 
on  an  annual  deposit  of  three  shillings  in  the  hundred 
pounds,  and  another  on  a first  class  risk  in  1789,  at 
two  shillings.  The  lowest  premium  on  a first  class 
building,  appears  at  that  time  to  have  been  the  rate  I 
have  just  mentioned.  The  average  of  all  the  premiums 
of  all  the  insurances  in  our  own  company,  in  1753,  the 
end  of  the  first  year,  was  but  1T7  hundredths  per  cent. ; 
and  in  1763,  at  the  end  of  ten  years  from  that  time, 
but  1-44  hundredths  per  cent.  The  average  of  the 
rates  appears  to  have  gradually  risen,  up  to  the  pres- 
ent time,  the  best  class  at  the  present  time  being  about 
two  per  cent,  deposit,  though  some  of  the  old  risks 
still  remain  lower;  and  I may  state  the  average  of  all 
our  insurances,  as  being  2-51  per  cent,  in  1822,  2*58  in 
1832,  2 63  in  1842,  and  the  same  in  1852.  How  this 
will  compare  with  the  average  rates  in  other  compa- 


43 


nies  in  this  country,  I cannot  tell,  nor  would  it  be 
interesting  to  know,  unless  they  were  like  our  own, 
selected  risks  upon  brick  and  stone  buildings  in  this 
city  almost  exclusively,  and  of  about  the  same  extent 
in  amount.  That  some  of  our  rates  are  too  low,  com- 
pared with  the  rates  of  the  best  risks,  I shall  make  a 
remark  presently  to  show ; but  in  the  main,  they  are 
thought  moderate,  and  are  uniformly  satisfactory  to 
the  public,  and  at  present  the  whole  funds  of  the  Com- 
pany are  probably  in  as  large  a proportion  to  all  the  in  - 
surances,  as  most  other  insurance  companies  can  show. 
I find*  that  in  the  year  1849,  the  whole  amount  of 
fire  insurance,  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  as  ascer- 
tained by  the  stamp  duties,  was  811,000,000  pounds 
sterling,  guaranteed  by  about  <£50,000,000  in  capitals 
set  apart,  and  obligations,  some  part  of  which  was  a 
security  for  life  insurances  also.  This  security  is  in 
the  proportion  of  about  6T6  dollars  for  every  100  dol- 
lars of  insurance.  The  aggregate  insurances  of  this 
Company  were  at  the  end  of  this  fiscal  year,  the  25th 
March,  7,974,707  dollars;  and  our  funds,  not  appli- 
cable to  any  other  risks,  were  694,545  dollars,  which 
is  about  8 74  dollars  for  every  100  dollars  of  insurance. 

Such  are  the  principles,  original  and  modified,  of 
this  Company,  its  progress,  and  its  present  state.  The 

* I derive  this  fact  and  some  others  which  I mention  from  the 
London  Assurance  Magazine,  for  September,  1850,  and  from  Mr. 
Tuckett’s  Monthly  Insurance  Journal,  published  in  this  city,  and 
which  ought  to  be  taken  by  all  the  insurance  companies  in  this 
country.  If  continued,  it  may  become  of  great  value. 


44 


statement  of  them  has,  I hope,  been  satisfactory  to  the 
contributors  who  are  present. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I have  felt  a very  strong  desire  to 
ascertain  the  true  original  of  this  Company, — its  pater- 
nity; fori  have  never  regarded  it  as  a scheme  that  could 
have  been  struck  out  at  once  in  this  city,  in  the  year 
1752.  I have  thought  that  its  very  name  indicated 
a foreign  origin.  “Philadelphia  Contrihutionsliip  for 
the  Insuring  of  Houses  from  Loss  by  Fire.”  This  name 
has  never  appeared  to  me  to  be  a name  derived  from  our 
municipal  use.  We  have  no  other  companies  so  called. 
Though  the  word  co7itrihutionsliip  is  a very  good  one, 
and  pretty  indicative  of  its  meaning,  yet  company, 
association,  society,  for  mutually  insuring  houses,  &c., 
would  have  done  just  as  well,  and  the  usage  in  other 
cases  among  us  has  been  so  to  describe  the  design,  and 
to  take  the  distinctive  name,  or  patronymic,  from  some 
city,  district,  county,  or  individual,  near  at  hand,  or 
well  known  to  us.  So  also  as  to  the  articles  of  agree- 
ment by  which  the  Company  is  regulated.  They  are 
commonly  described  as  m'ticles  of  agreement,  articles  of 
association,  constitution,  &c.  But  ours  are  called  the 
DEED  OF  SETTLEMENT.  We  have  no  practice  among  us 
of  calling  such  things  a deed  of  settlement,  and,  so  far 
as  my  knowledge  goes,  never  had.  There  is  no  other 
instance  known  to  me  in  this  city,  or  in  this  country. 
A deed  of  settlement  is  the  common  name  among  us 
for  the  instrument  that  conveys  property  in  execution 
of  a marriage  contract,  on  or  before,  or  in  consequence 


45 


of  marriage.  It  may  be  used  occasionally  in  reference 
to  deeds  of  property  upon  other  trusts,  but  it  is  rarely 
so  used ; in  reference  to  articles  of  association  for  in- 
suring, for  banking,  or  for  the  like  purposes,  never. 
I doubt  whether  such  a name  is  or  has  ever  been  given 
to  such  instruments  among  us.  This  peculiar  language 
has  greatly  fortified  my  impression  of  the  foreign  origin 
of  the  plan,  and  has  stimulated  and  directed  my  inqui- 
ries. After  some  labour,  and  at  length  by  good  luck, 
rather  than  by  regular  research,  in  poaching  among 
my  law  books  I think  I have  found  the  father  of  this 
bantling,  without  any  manner  of  doubt ; and  it  brings 
me  under  the  necessity  of  making  in  proof  of  it  a very 
unusual  citation  upon  such  an  occasion  as  this ; but  the 
reference  is  historical,  and  it  is  to  two  volumes  of  Chan- 
cery Reports,  from  which  combined  I get  the  whole 
story.  One  of  them  is  the  case  of  the  Sadlers^  Com- 
pany against  5«c/co6'^,  in  the  second  volume  of  Atkyns’s 
Reports;  and  the  other  the  case  of  Mildmay  v.  Folgam^ 
in  the  third  volume  of  Vesey  Junior’s  Reports.  Some 
of  you  may  never  have  heard  of  such  books  before. 
Your  leisure  is  given  to  pleasanter  ones.  But  they 
are  books  well  known  to  the  lawyers,  and  of  excellent 
authority  for  the  facts  they  state,  as  well  as  for  the 
law.  I refer  to  them,  however,  only  for  the  facts. 

From  these  cases  I learn  that  the  first  fire  insurance 
company  that  was  associated  in  London,  was  a mutual 
insurance  company,  instituted  in  1696.  It  had  nearly 
if  not  quite  the  same  characteristics  as  our  own.  The 


46 


policy  was  for  seven  years.  The  premium  was  for  the 
first  year  a rate  for  that  year,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
deposit,  that  would  furnish  the  rate  for  the  rest  of  the 
term.  This,  you  may  see,  was  abetter  compensation 
than  ours;  for  they  got  the  rate  at  the  moment  of  in- 
suring ; we  get  it  by  the  product  of  the  deposit,  at  the 
end  of  the  year.  All  risks  were  assumed  by  the  com- 
pany, without  exception  of  enemies,  military  or  usurped 
power,  rebellion,  civil  commotion,  or  riot.  The  pro- 
perty insured  was  protected  during  the  term  against 
any  number  of  losses  not  total,  without  reducing  the 
amount  insured  on  the  premises,  or  impairing  the  de- 
posit. In  case  of  destruction,  the  company  had  an 
option  to  repay  the  whole  sum  insured,  and  thus  to 
end  the  policy,  or  to  rebuild,  the  policy  continuing  in 
force ; and  how  often  soever  the  destruction  by  fire 
and  the  rebuilding  might  occur  during  the  term,  the 
policy  remained  in  force,  and  the  deposit  unimpaired. 
The  payment  of  the  deposit,  the  acceptance  of  the 
policy,  and  signing  the  articles  of  association,  made  the 
assured  a member  of  the  company.  The  concern  was 
for  the  profit  and  loss  of  the  members ; and  on  the  ter- 
mination of  the  policy,  the  assured  received  the  deposit 
and  his  proportion  of  profit.  Executors,  administrators, 
and  assigns,  were  included  as  members,  there  being  a 
provision  for  notice  of  transfer  and  assignment  within 
a limited  time,  and  the  approbation  of  the  directors. 

These  were  our  characteristics  at  the  outset, — and 
are  by  themselves  a proof  of  our  pedigree.  But  this  is 
not  all.  The  name  of  this  primitive  company  in  Lon- 


47 


don, was  The  Amicable  CoNTRiBUTiONsmp,and  Hand- 
in-Hand  Fire  Office.”  And  still  further,  the  articles  of 
association  were  called  in  the  instrument  itself,  and  in 
the  policy,  the  deed  of  settlement.  This  seems  to  be 
quite  enough  to  establish  the  filiation.  And  if  any- 
thing is  yet  wanting,  we  have  it  in  the  seal  and  mark, 
or  badge,  adopted  by  this  Company  at  its  first  meeting, 
the  four  hands  united,  the  Hand-in-Hand.  It  strikes 
me  that  the  proof  comes  as  nearly  to  demonstration, 
as  the  complete  lineaments  of  the  father  in  the  face  of 
his  child.  If  every  child  knew  its  own  father  as  well 
as  we  now  do,  there  would  have  been  a proverb  less. 
The  Amicable  Contributionship  Fire  Insurance  Com- 
pany,” better  known,  perhaps,  by  its  shorter  name  of 
the  Hand-in- Hand,  still  exists,  I believe,  in  London,  a 
mutual  assurance  company  against  fire;  and  the  prayer 
of  dutiful  descendants  ought  to  be,  that  it  may  long 
live  and  prosper. 

I beg  permission,  Mr.  Chairman,  after  these  rather 
diffuse  remarks  upon  the  origin  of  the  Philadelphia 
Contributionship,  its  principles,  progress,  and  present 
state,  to  detain  you  a few  minutes  longer,  by  some  of  a 
miscellaneous  character,  in  regard  to  the  spirit  of  its 
management,  its  usefulness  in  recent  times,  and  finally, 
upon  that  subject  to  which  I have  already  adverted, 
the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  as  to  the  proper 
rates  of  premiums  of  insurance  against  fire  in  this  city, 
and  the  method  which  seems  to  be  recommended  both 
by  experience  and  theory  for  its  improvement. 

First,  as  to  the  spirit  of  its  management.  I need 


48 


liardly  tell  you  that  it  has  been  universally  satisfactory. 
I have  never  heard  of  a complaint,  and  do  not  believe 
that  a complaint  has  been  made. 

In  the  adjustment  and  payment  of  losses,  and  in 
repairing  or  rebuilding,  the  Directors  are  umpires  be- 
tween one  member  of  the  Company,  and  all  the  others. 
They  have  no  dividends  to  declare,  nobody  is  depen- 
dent upon  them  for  any  part  of  their  income,  annual 
or  semi-annual.  The  prompt  and  liberal  adjustment 
and  payment  of  a loss  takes  nothing  from  anybody’. 
The  sacrifice  of  the  contingent  fund,  that  is  to  say,  of 
the  whole  amount  of  the  fund  beyond  the  deposits,  is 
never  required  to  propitiate  expectant  stockholders,  or 
to  forestall  their  complaints.  In  fine,  there  is  no  mo- 
tive of  any  kind  in  the  managers  of  the  Company,  to 
press  a point  either  of  law  or  fact  in  favor  of  the  whole 
body  to  the  prejudice  of  a suffering  member.  They 
are  dealing  with  a fund  which  is  not  their  own,  which 
cannot  be  their  own  directly  or  indirectly,  but  which 
is  a sacred  trust  in  their  hands  during  their  term  of 
office,  to  indemnify  their  members  who  suffer  by  fire, 
according  to  the  contract,  upon  the  fair  and  equitable 
principles  which  ought  to  govern  the  case.  The  rule 
of  the  office,  I might  almost  say  the  necessary  rule  of 
such  an  office,  is  to  make  a fair  and  liberal  estimate  of 
every  loss  that  occurs,  and  to  pay  it  promptly,  or  as 
promptly  to  remedy  it  by  repairing  or  rebuilding  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  party.  They  owe  justice  to  all 
The}^  have  no  right  to  pay  a loss  that  is  not  due.  But 
when  it  is  due  in  law  and  in  conscience,  they  ought 


49 


not  to  chaffer,  to  higgle,  to  compel  a compromise  by 
delay,  to  exact  an  allowance  for  prompt  payment,  or 
in  any  other  way  or  manner  to  put  themselves  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  suffering  member.  I do  not  mean  to  say 
that  any  company  in  this  city  does  so.  Most  generally 
bej^ond  doubt  they  do  the  reverse. 

The  Directors  of  this  Company,  however,  are  Trus- 
tees in  such  a case,  as  well  for  the  suffering  member 
as  for  the  whole  body,  and  not  merely  contractors  for 
an  indemnity;  and  they  are  bound  to  do  him  that 
liberal  justice  which  all  impartial  persons  shall  say  is 
fair.  This  has  been  the  spirit  of  its  management;  and 
the  result  has  been,  that  in  the  course  of  the  whole  cen- 
tury that  has  passed,  there  has  been  but  one  suit  at  law 
against  the  Company,  and  in  that  suit  the  Company 
was  successful.  My  friend,  the  Treasurer  and  Secre- 
tary, Mr.  Smith,  reminds  me  that  about  forty  years 
ago,  the  Directors  asked  my  professional  opinion  upon 
a case  which  threatened  to  become  a controversy  by 
the  tenacity  of  the  demand,  and  the  firm  refusal  of  the 
Directors  to  pay  any  part  of  it;  and  that  upon  seeing 
the  opinion  that  was  given,  the  insured  acquiesced.  I 
know  of  no  other  case  in  which  the  Directors  have 
asked  a professional  opinion  upon  their  liability.  In 
more  than  one  instance  of  refusal,  they  have  referred 
the  claimant  to  the  opinion  of  his  own  counsel,  and 
have  heard  no  more  of  the  claim.  They  have  conse- 
quently done  little  for  the  lawyers,  but  they  have  done 
all  the  more  for  the  members  of  the  Company.  I believe 
the  same  is  true  of  the  other  mutual  insurance  company 

4 


50 


in  this  city,  which  was  an  offset  as  it  were  from  this 
Company.  It  may  be  true  of  all  mutual  and  non-divi- 
dend-paying insurance  companies.  There  is  something 
in  their  constitution  which  promotes  this  happy  result. 
It  may  be  the  same  with  the  Amicable,  our  progenitor. 
In  one  particular,  that  Company  have  been  less  fortu- 
nate than  ourselves,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  number  of 
suits  against  them,  for  I have  found  two  reported  suits 
' against  that  Company,  in  the  course  of  the  last  cen- 
tury; but  it  is  quite  agreeable  to  me  to  say,  that  they 
succeeded  in  both. 

The  extent  of  usefulness  which  may  be  claimed  as 
the  praise  of  the  Company,  may  seem  small  to  compa- 
nies that  deal  in  larger  numbers,  and  assume  an  im- 
mense mass  of  risks  throughout  the  country,  on  mer- 
chandise as  well  as  on  buildings.  Ours  are  selected  risks 
on  brick  or  stone  buildings  in  this  city  or  its  neighbour- 
hood. It  is  a domestic  institution,  and  in  comparison 
with  some  gigantic  operations,  is  of  moderate,  though  of 
daily  expanding  business.  We  must  not  be  compared  in 
this  respect  with  some  others,  though  we  are  not  unwil- 
ling to  be  so  compared  in  all  other  respects.  But  we 
have  been  to  this  extent  useful  in  repairing  losses  to  the 
members,  and  in  restoring  and  improving  the  city,  that 
in  the  course  of  the  last  twelve  years  we  have  paid  for 
losses,  on  a single  fire,  in  one  instance  about  35,000 
dollars,  in  another  instance  about  80,000  dollars,  and 
that  the  average  of  our  losses  for  the  last  twenty  years 
has  been  about  10,000  dollars  per  annum;  varying,  be 
it  observed  as  a lesson  on  the  subject  of  annual  profits, 
from  1719  dollars  in  one  j^ear,  to  13,930  dollars  in  the 


51 


next,  and  again  in  the  next  to  35,829  dollars;  and  in 
another  part  of  the  term,  from  1569  dollars  in  one  year, 
to  85,153  dollars  in  the  year  that  next  followed.  The 
amounts  are  not  magnificent,  it  is  true;  but  it  does  not 
at  all  diminish  their  value  to  say,  as  may  be  said  with 
literal  truth,  that  payment  has  never  been  delayed  by 
the  Directors  a single  day  in  a single  instance  after 
the  loss  was  adjusted,  nor  an  adjustment  delayed  by 
th^m  for  a single  hour,  and  that  the  discount  of  a 
dollar  has  never  been  taken  for  prompt  pay,  anything 
in  the  policy  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

I promised  a further  remark  upon  the  character  of 
the  rates  of  deposit  upon  some  of  our  risks,  Avhich  gives 
colour  to  the  inference  that  they  are  at  present  too  low, 
compared  with  the  rates  of  first  class  risks, — I mean 
substantial  dwelling-houses,  in  good  positions,  which 
are  generally  insured  for  a deposit  of  2 to  2 J per  cent. 
The  other  class  of  risks  to  which  I refer,  are  substantial 
warehouses  or  stores,  as  we  call  them,  in  good  posi- 
tions, unoccupied  during  the  night;  and  the  ordinary 
rate  of  which  I may  state  at  about  3 to  3J  per  cent., 
with  the  liberty  of  storing  merchandise.  I state  this 
without  meaning  to  exclude  exceptions  for  various 
causes.  These  two  classes  are  adduced,  in  consequence 
of  there  being  buildings  in  the  one  class,  inhabited  at 
night,  and  in  the  other  not  inhabited  at  night,  and  to 
give  the  result  of  the  last  ten  years’  observations,  with 
reference  to  this  single  point  of  discrimination, — ex- 
cluding, however,  the  great  fire  of  1850,  which  merged 
all  differences  between  inhabited  and  not  inhabited  at 


52 


night,  by  its  violence  and  extent,  and  which  falls  into 
the  fiscal  year  ending  25th  of  March,  1851.  A table 
which  has  been  prepared  in  the  office,  will  exhibit  the 
proportions  of  loss  to  the  sums  insured,  upon  these  two 
classes  respectively. 


Table  of  fercentage  of  loss  on  buildings  in  which  persons 

SLEPT  AT  NIGHT,  AND  OF  BUILDINGS  IN  WHICH  NO  PERSON 
SLEPT  AT  NIGHT,  FROM  1843  TO  1852  INCLUSIVE. 


Year. 

Number 
inhabited 
at  night. 

Average  of 
loss  per  ct.  of 
sums  insured. 

Number 
not  inha- 
bited at 
night. 

1 

Average  of 
loss  per  ct.  j 
on  sums  in-  ! 
sured.  | 

1843,  . . 

5 

12 

Q 1 0 1 

1844,  . . 

2 

4_6_ 
^2  0 

1845,  . . 

5 

4 

8 1 

1846,  . . 

8 

lA 

9 

1847,  . . 

5 

5A 

7 

HI 

1848,  . . 

14 

10 

m 

1819,  . . 

13 

2A 

8 

4 2 

1850,  . . 

12 

8^ 

5 

1 

4 5 
^2  0 

1851,  . . 

1852,  . . 

27 

2A 

15  I 

1014 
■^'^2  0 

Total,  . 

91 

32^5 

O 

00 

QO  1 2 1 

°*^2-0-  1 

On  the  ninety-one  buildings  inhabited  at  night,  the 
average  of  all  the  averages  for  each  of  the  nine  years, 
was  per  cent.;  and  on  the  eighty  buildings  not  in- 
habited at  night,  was  or  about  threefold. 

The  inference  from  the  table,  without  further  ele- 
ments, will  not  strike  the  mind  as  conclusive;  but  it 
awakens  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  nearly  constant 
relation  which  the  inhabitance  or  non-inhabitance  of  a 
building  at  night,  has  to  the  extent  of  partial  loss  by 
fire;  and  it  is  perhaps  explained  by  the  necessary  ffict, 
that  a fire  must  in  general  gain  more  headway  or  in- 


\ 


53 


tensity  before  discovery  in  buildings  not  inhabited 
than  in  buildings  that  are  so  inhabited. 

But,  Mr.  Chairman,  where  are  we  at  present  in  re- 
ference to  the  whole  subject  of  fire  insurance  pre- 
miums? I have  asked  this  question  before.  Let  me 
resume  the  inquiry  a few  minutes  in  conclusion. 

What  knowledge  have  we  of  the  proper  rates  of  pre- 
mium to  be  charged  for  insurance  against  fire  in  this 
city?  I mean  what  accurate  knowledge?  The  sub- 
ject must  be  unlike  all  other  subjects  which  concern 
mankind,  or  by  some  means  or  other,  such  knowledge 
may  be  obtained.  But  are  we  at  present  in, the  right 
way  to  obtain  it  ? The  present  method  seems  to  be 
that  of  trying  a set  of  rates  for  a certain  term  of  time, 
and  if  they  result  in  loss  to  the  parties  insuring,  to 
raise  them;  and  as  there  have  been  two  or  three 
periods  or  terms,  in  which,  after  making  what  were 
supposed  to  be  profits,  and  dividing  them,  losses  have 
followed,  and  perhaps  continued  to  follow,  so  rates 
have  been  raised  from  time  to  time,  and  we  are  now, 
it  is  said,  on  the  eve  of  another  augmentation.  I can- 
not say  that  this  is  wrong.  The  projected  change  is 
very  natural.  But  can  a reason  be  given  why  the  late 
rates  have  been  too  low,  except  the  general  fact  that 
some  companies  have  lost  by  them  severely,  some  not 
so  much,  and  some  not  at  all,  while  some  perhaps  have 
gained?  Is  any  such  knowledge  of  the  law  of  this  dis- 
aster possessed,  as  to  enable  the  insurers  to  say  how 
much  they  must  raise  their  rates,  and  upon  what  risks 
in  particular,  to  prevent  the  same  thing  from  happening 
to  them,  which  has  already  happened  more  than  once? 


fj4 


Our  case  is  not  peculiar.  I do  not  know  how  it  is  in 
London,  except  as  I shall  show  that  they  are  at  least 
trying  to  learn  by  the  right  method.  But  in  Belgium, 
out  of  twelve  companies  authorized  by  the  government 
between  1830  and  1848,  but  eight  of  them  in  the  latter 
year  continued  the  business,  and  of  these  eight,  four  of 
them  lost  more  in  that  year  than  the  amount  of  pre- 
miums received;  three  only  made  a profit,  and  one  of 
them  made  no  return.  The  insurances  covered  in  the 
aggregate  nearly  300,000,000  dollars;  the  average  of 
the  premiums  was  85  centimes  per  thousand  francs; 
and  the  whole  mass  of  gain  for  the  year  was  about  1 1 
per  cent,  on  the  premiums.  There  seems  to  have  been 
a rather  imperfect  estimate  of  probabilities,  to  arrive  at 
such  a result.  If  no  better  can  be  made,  the  business 
is  a lottery,  and  almost  without  a scheme.  The  govern- 
ment of  Belgium  wished,  as  in  some  other  countries  in 
Europe,  to  become  insurer  for  the  whole  kingdom;  but 
after  making  careful  inquiries,  gave  it  up.  The  risks 
are  no  doubt  different  in  different  places,  mainly  de- 
pending, I suppose,  upon  the  supply  of  water,  and  the 
efficiency  of  fire  apparatus;  but  making  all  due  allow- 
ances on  this  head,  it  seems  extraordinary  that  any  pro- 
per estimate  of  probabilities,  should  have  resulted  in  the 
great  difference  of  rates  between  Belgium  and  certain 
places  where  government  is  the  insurer,  the  rate  I have 
stated  for  Belgium,  of  85  centimes  per  1000  francs,  or 
Is.  9d.  per  cent,  for  the  year,  being  the  average  of  all 
the  premiums  for  all  risks,  and  the  average  rates  for 
buildings  only,  the  least  hazardous  class,  being  in  W ur- 


55 


temberg,  2s.  6d.;  in  Baden,  2s.  9d.;  in  Saxony,  3s.  Id.; 
in  Bavaria,  3s.  9d. ; in  Switzerland,  5s.  Od. ; and  in 
Prussia,  5s.  8d.*  per  cent. ; while  in  Paris  the  pre- 
mium on  buildings  is  only  15  to  20  cents  per  1000 
francs,  or  from  4d.  to  5d.  per  hundred  pounds.  In  this 
state  of  our  knowledge  one  thing  seems  to  be  certain, 
that  all  the  profits  of  the  year  are  not  by  any  means 
profits  in  the  large  and  proper  sense  for  an  insurance 
company  to  adopt.  The  true  and  ultimate  profits  can 
be  estimated  only  upon  the  average  of  years,  probably 
of  many  years,  and  of  how  many,  we*  shall  know  only 
when  we  know  from  very  many  years’  accurate  obser- 
vation, what  is  the  average  of  disaster  one  year  with 
another  in  that  class  of  risks  which  the  insurer  assumes. 
Upon  a limited  range  of  business,  the  experience  of  a 
single  company  even  for  thirty  years,  derived  from  the 
results  of  their  business  only,  and  not  from  particular 
and  minute  observations  directed  to  all  the  circum- 
stances properly  classified,  may  be  a most  imperfect 
guide.  The  experience  of  several  companies,  being  of 
the  same  general  character,  cannot  be  worthy  of  much 
greater  reliance.  Indeed,  nothing  that  is  not  the  result 
of  the  largest  and  closest  observation  for  a long  period, 
of  all  the  phenomena  of  the  disaster  in  the  whole  field 
in  which  insurances  are  effected,  can  deserve  the  name 
of  knowledge.  If  rates  are  established  by  a company, 
on  the  information  derived  from  the  results  of  its  own 
insurances,  for  one  or  a dozen  years,  and  nothing  better, 
it  strikes  me  as  being  much  the  same  in  point  of  cer- 


* Assurance  Magazine,  Sept.,  1850. 


tainty,  as  if  a man  should  insure  lives  without  a mor- 
tality table,  upon  the  strength  of  what  he  had  observed 
among  his  own  acquaintances.  Insurance  upon  any 
such  basis  appears  to  be  empirical.  1 acknowledge 
our  own  practice  to  be  something  of  this  sort,  though 
probably  less  so  than  common  from  the  limited  descrip- 
tion of  risks  assumed  by  us ; but  we  do  the  best  we 
can  in  our  state  of  ignorance.  We  save  all  we  get  for 
the  payment  of  all  that  we  may  lose,  and  nobody  can 
do  more.  Our  accumulations  are  a security  for  our 
ignorance  or  inexperience,  and  those  who  insure  with 
us  cannot  have  a better  sponsor;  but  if  reservations  by 
dividend  companies  are  not  made  at  all,  or  are  made 
only  to  give  stability  to  dividends,  and  are  so  applied 
on  the  first  necessity,  then  they  are  not  a security  for 
those  who  are  insured,  but  for  stockholders  who  receive 
dividends,  and  they  are  no  guarantee  at  all  for  the  mis- 
takes of  ignorance  or  inexperience.  To  some  extent 
doubtless  the  capital  of  such  companies  is  such  a secu- 
rity; but  what  that  is  worth  depends  upon  the  amount 
and  characterof  the  insurances  made  by  the  Company, 
which,  as  the  law  now  stands,  the  public  in  this  State 
are  ignorant  of,  though  annually  informed  of  their 
assets. 

But  cannot  a rule  be  obtained  by  observation  and 
inquiry  ? Must  we  continue  in  the  present  state,  when 
few,  and  it  may  be  none  among  us,  can  give  a plain 
and  defensible  reason  for  naming  a given  rate  of  insu- 
rance, as  that  which  if  applied  to  a considerable  mass 
of  transactions  will  most  probably  meet  the  loss  on  the 


57 


kind  of  property  insured  for  one  year,  or  for  ten  years, 
or  for  an  unlimited  term,  and  also  pay  expenses  and 
leave  a fair  profit  to  the  insurers  ? Cannot  the  com- 
panies by  united  observations  accurately  and  minutely 
made,  and  prosecuted  for  a considerable  number  of 
years,  come  to  the  knowledge  of  such  facts  as  will  fur- 
nish a defensible  reason  for  naming  a certain  premium 
for  insuring  property  of  a given  description  against  the 
risks  of  fire  in  a given  place?  It  is  the  opinion  of 
scientific  men,  I believe,  that  by  observing  the  course 
of  events  extensively  and  accurately,  such  knowledge 
may  be  acquired,  and  with  it  a rule  of  insurance,  at 
least  approximately,  sufficient  for  practical  use.  In 
the  opinion  of  such  men,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  what 
may  be  called  the  law  of  any  species  of  disaster  in  the 
place  of  observation,  and  in  regard  to  fire  something 
like  a mortality  table,  a table  of  injury  as  well  as  of 
mortality  by  that  element,  in  the  case  of  houses  and 
merchandise,  and  its  variations  in  the  case  of  particular 
trades,  and  in  the  different  conditions  of  the  agents  and 
apparatus  for  arresting  and  extinguishing  fires.  Even 
a year’s  accurate  observation  may  do  something,  though 
perhaps  little.  Ten  years’  observation  may  give  a sen- 
sible approximation  to  a rule.  And  a century  may 
give  even  the  larger  variations,  the  plague  and  cholera 
losses,  as  I have  called  them.  But  the  time  it  may  take 
is  nothing.  The  observations  should  be  begun  at  once, 
and  never  cease,  because  new  circumstances  are  con- 
stantly occurring  to  increase  or  diminish  the  risk  of 
fires,  and  all  of  the  phenomena  should  be  constantly 


58 


and  regularly  observed.  It  is  the  duty  of  tlie  present 
day  to  begin.  It  will  be  the  duty  of  that  which  suc- 
ceeds to  follow  on.  We  should  constantly  keep  com- 
pany with  all  the  changes  in  the  place,  its  extension, 
the  heights  and  materials  of  its  buildings,  the  mer- 
chandise contained  in  them,  and  its  liability  to  sponta- 
neous combustion  and  explosion,  the  nature  and  ma- 
nagement of  dangerous  trades,  the  character  of  the  fire- 
men and  their  apparatus,  the  methods  of  warming  and 
lighting  the  dwellings  and  warehouses,  even  such  mat- 
ters as  the  matches  and  means  of  kindling  a light,  the 
loco-focos  and  lucifers  which  are  one  of  our  most  ope- 
rative dangers;  in  fine,  daily  and  regular  observation 
should  be  applied  to  everything  that  can  be  supposed 
to  affect  either  the  occurrence  of  fire  or  its  intensity. 
All  these  things  should  be  observed  in  their  results 
from  time  to  time  continually.  Is  there  any  doubt 
that  this  can  be  done,  I mean  that  the  observations 
may  be  made?  There  is  none  whatever;  and  it  can- 
not demand  an  expenditure  which  the  united  compa- 
nies cannot  both  conveniently  and  profitably  afford. 
Is  there  any  doubt  that  a close  approximation  to  a true 
rule  for  the  future  may  be  so  obtained?  Upon  the 
authority  of  wiser  persons,  I believe  there  is  none. 

The  method  of  persevering  observation  seems  to  be 
suggested  by  the  proposition  that  the  past  contains  our 
grounds  of  expectation  for  the  future;  and  it  seems  to 
be  equally  true  of  almost  all  kinds  of  events, — of  moral 
as  well  as  of  physical  phenomena,  of  those  which  seem 
to  be  the  result  of  the  freest  volition,  as  well  as  of 


59 


those  which  pass  with  the  unreflecting  observer  for 
mere  casualty  or  chance.  This  ground  of  expectation 
exists  in  regard  to  the  phenomena  of  society^  as  well 
as  in  regard  to  those  of  nature.  What  has  happened 
will  under  the  same  circumstances  happen  again.  The 
same  causes  will  continue  to  produce  the  same  effects. 
When  and  how,  and  to  what  extent,  and  in  what  pro- 
portion they  will  happen  in  the  future,  may  reasonably 
be  inferred  from  the  times,  places,  extent,  and  propor- 
tion of  their  occurrence  heretofore;  and  the  more  ex- 
tensive and  prolonged  is  the  observation  of  what  has 
happened,  the  greater  is  our  ability  to  foretell  the 
future;  that  is  to  say,  to  declare  the  degree  of  proba- 
bility that  the  same  will  happen  again.  Of  course,  a 
change  in  the  causes  of  events,  the  action  of  new  causes, 
and  the  inaction  of  former  causes,  must  modify  the  re- 
sult; and  this  constitutes'  the  great  value  of  the  prin- 
ciple in  political  economy. 

I have  already  referred  to  Dr.  Halley’s  table  of  mor- 
tality to  ascertain  the  value  of  premiums  of  insurance 
on  lives.  This  was  nothing  more  than  an  inference 
from  the  past,  of  what  would  be  in  future  the  propor- 
tion of  deaths  at  certain  times  among  a certain  number 
of  persons.  But  there  is  nothing  in  the  phenomena  of 
life  or  death  among  mankind,  that  makes  that  subject 
the  only  field  in  which  such  observations  can  be  pro- 
fitably employed  as  a basis  for  inferences  of  a corre- 
sponding character.  They  may  be  made  with  similar 
results  in  regard  to  the  phenomena  of  fire  and  flood,  of 
marriages,  of  crimes,  of  collisions  at  sea,  of  things  in 


00 


which  man  seems  to  be  tlie  only  agent,  and  of  things  in 
which  he  has  no  agency,  or  no  apparent  agency  at  all; 
of  the  movements  of  men  and  women  acting  with  per- 
fect freedom,  and  of  matter  that  has  neither  perception 
nor  will ; and  by  this  method,  we  may  obtain  practical 
certainty  in  regard  to  future  events  by  the  experience 
of  the  past,  approaching  it  through  the  increasing  mass 
of  past  observations,  from  the  lowest  degree  of  proba- 
bility up  to  the  highest.  This  science  of  observation  is 
acquiring  new  value  every  day,  and  giving  increased 
certainty  to  a vast  number  of  operations,  which  with- 
out statistics  would  have  no  certainty  at  all. 

I dare  say  some  of  you  have  been  amused,  as  I cer- 
tainly was  myself,  to  see  what  a strange  result  has  been 
obtained  by  M.  Qiietelet  from  the  general  registry  of 
marriages  in  Belgium.  If  anything  is  beyond  calcula- 
tion, it  would  seem  to  be  the  proportion  to  marriages 
between  men  and  women  of  all  other  ages,  of  such 
marriages  as  take  place  between  an  old  man  of  sixty 
and  upwards,  and  a young  woman  of  thirty  and  under; 
and  between  a young  man  of  thirty  and  under,  and  an 
old  lady  of  sixty  and  upwards.  The  thing  seems  to 
defy  calculation  beforehand.  We  cannot  imagine  that 
there  is  any  regular  proportion  at  all.  Such  mis- 
matches seem  to  be  a matter  of  mere  accident,  or  bad 
luck,  and  that  no  constant  causes  can  exist  to  produce 
them  in  any  regular  proportion  whatever  to  the  whole 
mass  of  marriages  in  the  country.  Nevertheless,  as  if 
men  and  women  had  no  will  of  their  own  in  such  mar- 
riages, or  in  any  marriages  at  all,  whatever  they  may 


61 


think,  Quetelet  establishes  in  the  clearest  manner  from 
the  marriage  registry  for  several  years,  a regular  propor- 
tion, some  5 in  1000, 1 do  not  recollect  the  precise  pro- 
portion, continuing  through  successive  periods.  This 
looks  very  much  like  predestination,  and  in  cases  in 
which  there  is  generally  thought  to  be  the  coolest  voli- 
tion possible.  It  is  of  a nature  to  make  matrimonial  can- 
didates of  the  ages  concerned,  look  about  them.  Who 
knows  whether  he  or  she  is  not  destined  to  be  one  of 
the  five  ? But  there  is  neither  destiny  nor  chance  about 
the  matter.  It  is  nothing  more  than  the  operation  of 
such  motives  upon  the  will,  as  in  the  infinite  modifica- 
tions of  condition,  circumstances,  and  wants,  in  ahighly 
artificial  and  refined  society,  are  found  by  experience 
to  occur  in  this  proportion  to  the  greater  mass  of  causes 
operating  in  what  we  call  a more  natural  direction. 
The  freedom  of  the  will  is  ours,  and  the  responsibility 
that  belongs  to  it.  The  combination  of  causes  is  the 
work  of  the  Divine  architect  and  administrator,  per- 
formed in  perfect  coincidence  with  our  freedom  and 
moral  responsibility. 

The  same  principle  is  philosophically  adopted,  and 
acutely  applied,  by  my  friend,  Mr.  Biddle,  who  sits 
near  me,  in  the  administration  of  the  Philadelphia 
Savings  Bank  in  our  neighbourhood. 

What  is  it  that  in  one  month  shall  impel,  or  rather 
induce,  the  mass  of  the  current  depositors  in  that  ex- 
cellent institution,  to  place  more  on  deposit  than  is 
taken  out,  and  to  do  this  in  particular  months  with 
considerable  regularity,  from  year  to  year,  while  in 


(V2 


other  m on  tli  s,  w i th  si  in  i 1 ar  peri  od  i city,  tl  i e reverse  takes 
place,  so  that  the  experience  of  the  past  becomes  a 
ground  of  what  may  almost  be  called  prophecy  for  the 
future  ? By  this  guide  the  President  of  the  institution 
is  able  to  state  with  great  probability  whether  the 
Savings  Fund  will  be  or  minun  for  such  months, 
and  regulate  its  reservations  accordingly.  This  is  un- 
doubtedly the  free  choice  of  uncombined  individuals, 
conscious  of  their  freedom,  and  moral  agents  in  the  use 
of  it ; but  the  formal  causes  or  occasions  of  their  deci- 
sion one  way  or  the  other,  are  floating  in  the  infinite 
mass  of  combinations  about  them,  and  periodically  and 
with  great  regularity  impress  the  mass  of  persons  in 
their  conditions.  These  statistics  are  consequently  of 
use  to  the  Savings  Bank,  and  are  perhaps  of  more 
value  as  the  pulse  of  the  condition  of  the  depositors, 
and  of  even  more  than  that. 

It  would  be  an  error  to  regard  this  as  altogether  a 
moral  phenomenon,  and  not  to  be  compared  with  the 
physical  phenomena  of  fire  ; for  although  this  is  true 
of  the  mere  result,  that  the  one  is  moral  and  the  other 
at  least  to  a great  degree  physical,  yet  the  occurrences 
are  equally  the  subject  of  observation,  and  may  equally 
well,  after  a long  series  of  observations,  be  found  by 
analysis  to  have  what  may  be  called  a law  of  occur- 
rence. It  is  not  true,  however,  of  the  formal  causes 
or  occasions  of  these  different  results,  savings  by  depo- 
sitors, anddestroyingsby  fire,  that  they  are  exclusively 
either  moral  or  physical,  but  they  are  a product  of 
both  ; and  I have  no  doubt  that  observations  applied 


63 


to  the  season  and  the  weather,  occasioning  an  increased 
want  of  fuel,  lights,  clothing,  and  the  like,  or  diminish- 
ing such  wants,  would  be  found  to  have  a striking  par- 
allelism with  the  plus  and  minus  receipts  of  the  Savings 
Bank;  and  in  like  manner,  that  the  statistics  of  neg- 
ligence, unthrift,  firemen’s  rows,  and  disorder,  though 
all  of  them  negatives,  would  also  be  found  to  have  a 
decided  bearing  on  the  phenomena  of  fire.  On  obtain- 
ing the  result  of  such  statistics,  the  nonexistence  of  an 
event,  it  has  been  shrewdly  said,  will  be  found  to  have 
been  an  event,  and  a productive  event,  that  has  affected 
the  result;  as  we  may  very  well  see  in  the  relation  that 
fire  apparatus  bears  to  the  loss  by  fire,  whether  to  the 
happening  of  the  fire  or  not;  so  that  in  the  two  condi- 
tions of  having  an  efficient  fire  apparatus,  or  not  having 
any  or  a very  bad  one,  we  naturally  expect  to  find  an 
entirely  different  result  as  to  the  extent  of  loss  by  fire. 

But  I must  bring  these  remarks  to  a point.  The 
attention  of  the  insurance  companies  in  London  has 
been  particularly  given,  since  the  year  1832,  to  the 
statistics  of  fire  in  that  city,  and  already  with  a very 
striking  result.  That  it  must  enlighten  them  as  to 
their  rates  of  insurance  against  loss  by  fire,  cannot  be 
doubted;  because  it  has  given,  or  will  finally  give  them 
a basis,  upon  which  they  can  erect  their  scientific  cal- 
culations of  probabilities  for  their  respective  operations, 
in  like  manner  as  life  insurance  companies  do. 

Mr.  Tuckett’sMonthly  Insurance  Journal  for  Febru- 
ary, 1852,  gives  extracts  from  an  essay  by  Samuel 
Brown,  Esq.,  Fellow  of  the  Institute  of  Actuaries,  a 


64 


recent  institution  in  London, of  great  promise,  ‘^On  the 
fires  in  London  during  the  seven  teen  years  from  1833  to 
1849  inclusive,  the  numbers  which  occurred  indifferent 
trades,  and  the  principal  causes  by  which  they  were 
occasioned.”  Without  going  into  an  analysis  of  losses 
in  the  different  trades  and  other  particulars,  which  are 
shown  in  subsequent  numbers  of  the  Journal,  I will 
confine  myself  to  the  statement  of  fires,  annual  and 
aggregate  in  the  whole  period,  and  of  losses,  total, 
severe,  and  slight,  in  the  city  and  its  vicinity.  The 
whole  number  of  fires  for  the  whole  term  of  seventeen 
years,  as  derived  from  the  reports  of  Mr.  Braidwood, 
the  Superintendent  of  the  Metropolitan  Fire  Brigade, 
to  the  Committee  for  Managing  the  London  Fire  En- 
gine Establishment,  was  11,305,  an  average  of  665 
each  year,  the  first  and  lowest  year  having  been  458, 
and  the  last  and  highest  838,  showing  an  increase  in 
seventeen  years  of  about  91  per  cent.,  or  about  5’35  per 
cent,  annually.  The  annual  increase  was  not,  how- 
ever, precisely  in  this  ratio,  but  fluctuated  some- 
thing from  year  to  year,  but  generally  increased,  the 
writer  supposes,  as  the  city  and  suburbs  increased. 
The  cases  of  total  loss  present  these  ratios: — for  the 
first  term  of  five  years,  5*85  per  cent.;  for  the  second 
term  of  five  years,  3*76;  for  the  third  term  of  five 
years,  3*27;  and  for  the  last  two  years, 3*35;  the  ave- 
rage of  all  being  3-99;  so  as  to  justify  the  expectation 
that  in  a long  period  of  years  the  proportion  of  totally 
destroyed  will  be  about  4 per  cent.  Of  the  seriously 
damaged,  which  I suppose  to  mean  50  per  cent,  and 


65 


more,  the  averages  for  the  four  terms  before  stated, 
were  25*53,  29*68,  31*56,  30*25;  and  the  average  of 
all  the  proportions  was  29*50.  The  damaged, 

which  included  all  other  degrees  of  loss,  had  the  follow- 
ing proportions  in  the  same  terms,  68*62,  66*56,  65*17, 
66*40;  and  the  average  of  all  the  years,  66.51.  The 
number  totally  destroyed,”  grad  u ally  diminished  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  term,  which  probably 
speaks  the  praise  of  the  Fire  Brigade ; and  the  infe- 
rence from  the  whole  is  that  two-thirds  of  all  the  losses 
were  quarter  losses,  or  thereabout,  and  the  remaining 
third  was  divided  between  half  and  total,  the  total  loss 
being  about  4 per  cent. 

The  regularity  of  these  proportions  in  all  the  periods 
after  the  first,  when  the  efficiency  of  the  Fire  Brigade 
was  perhaps  incomplete,  is  remarkable.  The  import- 
ance and  use  of  such  statistics,  when  obtained  in  regard 
to  the  proportions  in  which  particular  conditions,  such 
as  trades,  and  the  materials,  height,  and  structure  of 
buildings,  enter  into  the  respective  average  proportions 
before  stated,  are  greatly  enhanced  for  general  purposes, 
as  well  as  for  those  of  the  fire  insurance  companies. 
There  is  no  reason  that  I know  of,  why  the  same  sta- 
tistics may  not  be  obtained  here,  from  this  time  hence- 
forth ; and  I venture  to  predict,  that  when  we  obtain 
a fire  establishment,  located  and  governed  by  one  pre- 
siding authority,  the  statistics  will  tell  of  its  influence 
in  diminishing  the  total  losses,  as  well  as  upon  the  pro- 
portions of  those  less  than  total. 

Permit  me  to  state,  sir,  in  this  connexion,  a remark- 


5 


66 


able  result  that  seems  to  have  obtained  in  France.  I 
get  it  from  the  first  number  of  the  London  Assurance 
Magazine.  If  there  are  similar  statistics  of  fires  in 
Paris,  Lyons,  and  Marseilles,  as  Mr.  Braidwood’s  re- 
port gives  for  London,  they  are  unknown  to  me.  The 
Assurance  Magazine  does  not  give  them,  nor  refer  to 
them  as  existing.  France  is  much  behind  England  in 
fire  insurance  in  point  of  time,  but  much  before  her  in 
point  of  present  expansion ; for  the  writer  I refer  to 
gives  the  amount  insured  in  France  in  184  8,  by  fourteen 
proprietary  companies,  at  nearly  929,000,000  pounds 
sterling,  and  including  the  mutual  companies,  at 
<£1,320,000,000;  more  than  50  per  cent,  greater  than 
the  fire  insurances  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  in  the 
same  year.  There  has  consequently  been  an  immense 
field  for  the  trial  of  rates,  and  of  the  efficiency  of  fire 
corps,  in  arresting  and  diminishing  losses.  The  result 
obtained  is  this.  In  Paris,  the  corps  of  Pompiers  ” is  of 
the  first  efficiency.  It  cannot  have  better  apparatus  than 
our  own,  and  it  has  not  as  good  a supply  of  water,  but 
it  is  distributed  in  due  proportion  over  the  whole  city, 
and  is  governed  by  one  authority  over  all,  with  proper 
subdivision  and  subordination.  It  is  apublic  establish- 
f ment.  The  houses  in  Paris  are  almost  always  panelled 

with  wood,  and  wood  abounds  in  staircases,  in  floors,  &c. 

Yet  the  premium  of  insurance  (annual),  is  only  15 
to  20  centimes  per  1000  francs,  4d.  to  5d.  per  £100; 
whereas,  at  Lyons,  where  the  houses  are  mostly  built 
of  granite,  and  with  stone  staircases  up  to  the  top,  the 
premium  is  about  double;  and  at  Marseilles,  where  the 


67 


houses  are  constructed  in  a similar  manner  as  in  Lyons, 
but  with  the  additional  advantage  of  the  floor  being 
covered  with  tiles  instead  of  wood,  the  premium  is  as 
high  as  50  centimes  per  1000  francs,  which  is  more 
than  double.  The  difference  depends  entirely  on  the 
superior  organization  of  the  ‘Pompiers’  in  Paris,  as 
compared  with  the  two  other  places.” 

The  city  of  Philadelphia,  as  well  as  the  insurance 
companies,  should  ponder  this  important  fact. 

I have  a concluding  fact  to  state,  which  it  is  as  im- 
portant for  the  companies  to  advert  to  as  anything  in 
these  averages  for  a few  years.  The  latter  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  effect  of  constant  causes  or  quantities 
always  or  generally  operating.  But  there  are  causes 
that  are  not  constant,  or  if  constant  they  operate  at 
longer  intervals,  the  period  of  which  it  requires  much 
longer  observation  to  obtain,  and  which  no  cautious 
fire  insurance  companies  can  disregard  without  great 
injury  to  all  who  depend  upon  them.  I will  illustrate 
what  I mean,  by  a reference  to  our  river  freshes  or 
floods,  which  are  equally  within  the  reach  of  statistics, 
or  of  observations  regularly  made  and  recorded.  In 
the  year  1821,  the  dam  at  Fairmount  was  completed, 
and  the  power  to  supply  the  city  with  water  obtained. 
In  February,  1822,  there  was  an  ice  fresh  in  the 
Schuylkill,  a flood  which  raised  the  water  at  the  Falls 
about  twenty  feet,  and  with  it  the  broken  ice  of  un- 
usual thickness;  and  the  current  being  obstructed  by 
the  lodgment  of  the  ice  at  Peters’s  Island,  and  other 
points  on  the  river,  and  especially  at  the  gorge  of  the 


(>8 


Falls,  tlie  bridge  at  this  point  was  lifted  off  its  piers, 
just  before  tlie  whole  mass  in  the  river,  broke  through 
its  obstructions,  and  began  to  pass  downward,  and  itcar- 
ried  the  bridge  down  the  river  and  over  the  darn,  where 
the  last  was  heard  of  it.  The  Bridge  Company  sued 
the  Schuylkill  Navigation  Company  for  the  loss,  as 
being  occasioned  by  their  dam,  and  I was  of  counsel 
with  the  defendants.  The  plaintiffs  showed  of  course 
the  average  height  of  such  ice  floods  for  several  years, 
and  established  a ratio,  that  would  not  reach  their 
bridge.  Even  the  maximum  of  all  they  showed  was 
too  low  to  endanger  it.  The  dam,  therefore,  a new 
obstruction,  was  assumed  to  have  been  the  cause  of 
their  loss.  But  the  defendants  proved  by  ancient  wit- 
nesses that  in  1784,  thirty-seven  years  befoi’e  the  dam 
was  built,  there  was  an  ice  fresh  of  greater  height,  by 
from  two  to  four  feet,  at  the  same  points  on  the  same 
river;  and  afterwards,  in  1816,  that  another  ice  fresh 
of  nearly  the  same  height  occurred,  when  a former 
bridge  was  lost;  and  lastly,  that  the  plaintiffs  were  ad- 
vised to  build  their  last  bridge  several  feet  higher,  to 
provide  for  the  probable  though  rare  and  irregularly 
recurring  violence  of  the  ice  freshes.  The  period  of 
their  return  was  not  ascertained,  but  they  had  returned, 
and  must  be  expected  to  return  again.  The  dam  was 
not  a cause  at  all;  it  rather  diminished  the  obstruc- 
tions above,  by  deepening  the  water;  but  the  true  cause 
was  an  extraordinary  concurrence  of  natural  causes  at 
that  time,  a hard  winter,  thick  ice,  the  earth  covered 
with  snow  so  as  to  absorb  little  of  the  rain  that  fell. 


69 


some  warm  days  to  thaw  the  ice,  and  a long-continued 
heavy  rain  of  several  days,  fdling  the  channel  of  the 
river  too  suddenly  to  admit  of  being  quickly  drained 
off.  The  plaintiffs  did  not  succeed  in  their  cause.  In 
about  twenty  years  after  this,  another  ice  fresh  occur- 
red, principally  affecting  the  tributaries  of  the  Dela- 
ware, which  almost  totally  swept  out  the  locks  and 
canals  of  the  head  waters  of  the  Lehigh. 

So  it  is  with  fires.  All  the  causes  are  not  constant,  or 
the  concurrence  of  all  that  are  the  most  unfavourable 
and  aggravating,  does  not  happen  as  frequently  as  the 
concurrence  of  some  of  them  does.  An  average  of 
twenty,  thirty,  or  even  forty  years  may  not  include  such 
great  calamities;  buttheycome  nevertheless, and  those 
who  insure  on  perpetual  policies,  or  perpetually  in- 
sure by  annual  policies,  are  sure  to  be  met  by  them. 
Marine  insurances^re  better  off.  The  average  of  seasons 
in  given  latitudes,  in  time  of  peace,  is  well  ascertained, 
and  underwriters  can  generally  scent  the  taint  of  war  a 
considerable  time  before  the  blast  is  upon  them,  and  can 
either  exclude  the  risk, or  augment  the  premium.  But 
the  insurer  has  no  notice  of  the  impending  conflagration 
before  it  endangers  the  fourth  or  the  half  of  a city.  I 
> need  not  advert  to  the  great  fire  of  London,  which  oc- 
curred before  fire  insurances  were  known  in  England, 
and  destroyed  houses  to  the  value  of  ten  millions, 
sterling;  nor  to  the  fire  in  Lord  George  Gordon’s  com- 
motion, when  it  was  said  that  on  one  night,  the  smoky 
canopy  of  London  was  lurid  with  the  light  of  thirty 
fires  at  once,  in  different  parts  of  the  city;  nor  to  the 


70 


fire  on  RadclifTe  Highway,  in  1794,  in  the  same  city, 
which  totally  destroyed  63G  houses;  but  I may  pro- 
perly refer  to  our  own  cities  and  towns,  Albany,  Pitts- 
burg, St.  Louis,  Chilicothe,  and  many  others,  especially 
to  the  great  fire  in  New  York,  in  1835,  which  it  is  said 
destroyed  property  in  buildings  and  merchandise  to  the 
extent  of  twenty-seven  millions  of  dollars.  That  great 
disaster  caught  the  fire  insurance  companies  in  New 
York  in  their  sleep,  and  I believe  ruined  most  of  them. 
They  thought  that  they  had  the  true  average;  but  they 
had  not  provided  for  a calamity  that  was  as  much  a 
part  of  the  future  as  the  rest,  though  for  want  of  larger 
statistics  its  periodicity  was  unknown.  I have  heard  of 
one  of  those  companies  having  a capital  of  a million, 
and  a contingent  fund  of  $200,000,  reserved  to  give  con- 
stancy to  its  dividends,  and  which  had  made  large  divi- 
dends of  profits  for  many  years ; but  capital  and  contin- 
gent fund  together  were  able  to  pay  but  sixty  per  cent, 
on  their  losses  by  that  fire!  If  such  a fire  had  been  re- 
garded not  as  probable,  but  still  as  not  so  low  on  the 
scale  of  probabilities  as  to  be  thought  impossible,  a 
moderate  reservation  accumulated  for  several  years, 
not  to  give  steadiness  to  dividends,  but  to  provide  for 
the  want  of  statistics  in  the  history  of  fires,  or  a more 
widely  distributed  selection  of  risks,  might  have  saved 
the  Company  and  those  who  insured  with  it  also. 

. It  is  this,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  we  want,  and  which  I 
hope  that  we  shall  now  at  last  begin  to  obtain.  Our 
ancestors,  a century  ago  this  day,  set  in  motion  this 
great  security;  the  comfort  of  all  who  make  use  of  it, 


71 


if  it  is  managed  on  right  principles.  If  they  suffer  by 
fire,  their  comfort  is  to  have  an  indemnity  immediately 
supplied  to  them.  It  ought  not  to  be  jeoparded.  If  they 
do  not  suffer,  their  comfort  is  scarcely  less,  to  hope 
confidently  that  it  is  in  store,  to  be  supplied  when  the 
disaster  shall  fall  upon  them;  and  this  hope  should  be 
made  sure  to  them,  beyond  all  reasonable  apprehen- 
sion. 

I will  detain  the  Contributors  no  longer.  I have 
already  detained  them  too  long.  We  shall  none  of  us 
be  here  at  the  next  centennial  meeting,  to  speak  of 
those  who  have  gone  before  us  in  the  administration 
of  the  Company,  or  to  trace  the  influence  of  their  ope- 
rations upon  the  comfort  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the 
stability  and  improvement  of  the  city.  But  I trust 
that  those  who  may  then  be  present  will  have  as  much 
reason  to  speak  favourably  of  us  for  our  constancy  in 
the  maintenance  of  the  great  principle  of  1763 — the 
devotion  of  all  that  the  Company  can  gain  to  the  pay- 
ment of  all  that  the  members  can  lose — as  I have  had 
to  speak  of  their  wisdom  and  foresight  in  introducing 
the  principle  among  us.  I fervently  hope  that  its  ope- 
ration may  never  be  arrested  or  impaired,  and  that  the 
Company  may  continue  and  prosper  for  centuries  to 
come,  a great  and  perennial  public  blessing. 


, V ‘ ■ 

•'■V  f 
' T'* 

^ r 

« . . 


OFFICERS 


i OB'  THE 

PHILADELPHIA  CONTRIBUTIONSHIP, 

CHOSEN  AT  THE  FIRST  ELECTION,  HELD 
APRIL  13th,  1752. 


DIRECTORS. 


BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN, 
WILLIAM  COLEMAN, 
PHILIP  SYNC, 

SAMUEL  RHODES, 

HUGH  ROBERTS, 

SRAEL  PEMBERTON,  Jr., 


JOHN  MIFFLIN, 
JOSEPH  MORRIS, 
JOSEPH  FOX, 
JONATHAN  ZANE, 
WILLIAM  GRIFFITTS, 
AMOS  STRETTELL. 


TREASURER. 

JOHN  SMITH. 


OFFICERS  ELECTED  APRIL  12,  1852. 


DIRECTORS. 


JOSHUA  LONGSTRETH, 
HORACE  BINNEY, 
WILLIAM  H.  HART, 
WILLIAM  SMITH, 
LEWIS  WALN, 

DR.  CHARLES  WILLING, 


ALEXANDER  W.  JOHNSTON, 

J.  PEMBERTON  HUTCHINSON, 
JOSEPH  SWIFT, 

HENRY  J.  WILLIAMS, 
RICHARD  P.  LARDNER, 

DR.  J.  RODMAN  PAUL. 


TREASURER. 

JAMES  S.  SMITH. 


74 


DIRECTORS  FROM  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  COMPANY, 
APRIL,  1752. 


DIRECTORS. 

From 

To 

Terra  of  Service. 

Abbott,  William 

1886 

1840 

4 years. 

Baynton,  John 

1755 

1758 

3 

a 

Bedford,  Gunnini^ 

1762 

1801 

39 

(C 

Binney,  Horace 

1817 

1819 

<( 

Binney,  Horace 

1831 

1870 

39 

Borie,  Adolph  E. 

1862 

Biddle,  Alexander 

1864 

Coates,  Samuel 

1788 

1803 

15 

<( 

Coates,  Josiah  L. 

1803 

1810 

7 

a 

Coleman,  William 

1752 

1754 

2 

n 

Collins,  Zaccheus 

1803 

1831 

29 

(( 

Cooper,  Jacob 

1758 

1759 

1 

Crosby,  Thomas 

1754 

1757 

3 

u 

Crukshank,  Joseph 

1799 

1836 

37 

u 

Dawson,  Mordecai  L. 

1836 

1838 

2 

(( 

Deshler,  David 

1758 

1790 

32 

(( 

Dilworth,  William 

1762 

1765 

3 

(< 

Downing,  Jacob 

1796 

1817 

21 

u 

Dnffield,  Edward 

. 1759 

1766 

7 

<< 

Evans,  David 

1794 

1809 

15 

<( 

Evans,  John  C. 

1806 

1819 

13 

<< 

Evans,  Jonathan 

1765 

1785 

20 

u 

Fisher,  Coleman 

1828 

1836 

8 

ii 

Fisher,  William 

1754 

1758 

4 

(( 

Fox,  Charles  P. 

1835 

1836 

1 

(( 

Fox,  George 

1819 

1829 

10 

u 

Fox,  Joseph 

1752 

1762 

1 23 

<< 

Fox,  'Joseph 

1767 

1780 

13 

Fox,  Samuel  M. 

1792 

1797 

5 

(( 

Franklin,  Benjamin 

1752 

1754 

2 

(( 

Franklin,  Walter 

1802 

1808 

4 

(( 

Gordon,  Thomas 

1757 

1761 

4 

u 

Griffitts,  William 

1752 

1753 

1 

<( 

Gowen,  Franklin  B. 

1875 

Howell,  Joshua 

1762 

1763 

^20 

(( 

Howell,  Joshua 

1766 

1785 

19 

75 


DIRECTOKS. 


Hart,  William  H. 
Hartshorrie,  Pattison 
Hillegas,  Michael 
Hutchinson,  Pemberton  J. 
Huston,  Alexander 
Harmar,  William 
Henry,  Alexander 

James,  Abel 

Johnston,  Alexander  W. 
Jones,  Charles 
Jones,  Charles 
Jones,  Isaac 
Jones,  John 
Jones,  Eobert  S. 

Lardner,  Alexander 
Lewis,  Jacob 
Lewis,  Joseph  S. 

Lewis,  Mordecai 
Lewis,  Samuel 
Logan,  James 
Longstreth,  Joshua 
Lardner,  Eichard  P. 

Mifflin,  John 
Morgan,  Evan 
Morgan,  Benjamin  E. 
Morgan,  Thomas 
Morris,  Joseph 
Morris,  Luke 
Morris,  Joseph  S. 

Morris,  Samuel 
Morris,  Thomas,  Sr., 
Morris,  Thomas,  Jr., 
Morrison,  William 
Morton,  John 
Morris,  George  C. 

Norris,  Joseph  P. 

Or^,  John 

Palmer,  John 
Paschall,  Joseph 
Parke,  Hr.  Thomas 
Pearson,  Isaac 
Pemberton,  James 
Pemberton,  Israel,  Jr., 


From 

To 

Term  of  Service. 

lb86 

1787 

1820 

33  years. 

1772 

1777 

5 “ 

1841 

1866 

25  “ 

1763 

1772 

9 “ 

1855 

1872 

17  “ 

1874 

1753 

1757 

4 ‘‘ 

1841 

1855 

14  “ 

1754 

1757 

9^}  12  “ 

1763 

1774 

1753 

1755 

2 “ 

1756 

1758 

2 “ 

1777 

1782 

5 “ 

1841 

1848 

7 “ 

1756 

1762 

7 “ 

1805 

1817 

13  “ 

1785 

1799 

14  “ 

1836 

1841 

5 “ 

1753 

1754 

1 “ 

1819 

1869 

50  ‘‘ 

1848 

1752 

1754 

2 “ 

1754 

1763 

9 “ 

1820 

1840 

20  “ 

1799 

1805 

6 “ 

1752 

1754 

2 “ 

1762 

1784 

22  '' 

1809 

1817 

8 

1758 

1762 

4 “ 

1784 

1809 

25  “ 

1817 

1841 

24  “ 

1840 

1848 

8 “ 

1785 

1828 

44  ‘‘ 

1871 

1797 

1836 

39  “ 

1759 

1760 

1 “ 

1764 

1765 

1 “ 

1780 

1795 

15  “ 

1827 

1835 

8 “ 

1809 

1816 

7 “ 

1753 

1756 

3 “ 

1752 

1754 

2 “ 

76 


DIRECTORS. 

From 

To 

Terra  of  Service. 

Pennincjlon,  Edward 

1768 

1764 

1 

year. 

Perot,  John 

1792 

1819 

27 

i( 

Poalson,  Zachariah 

1810 

1844 

34 

(( 

Price,  Joseph 

1818 

1846 

28 

u 

Paul,  Dr.  J.  Eodman 

1848 

Price,  Joseph 

1869 

Eakestraw,  Joseph 

1778 

1794 

16 

u 

Eawle,  Francis 

1761 

1762 

1 

u 

Rawle,  William 

1790 

1792 

2 

u 

Eeeve,  Peter 

1761 

1787 

28 

it 

Ehoads,  Samuel 

1752 

1763 

11 

u 

Eoberts,  George,  Sr., 

1774 

1799 

25 

u 

Eoberts,  George,  Jr., 

1828 

1836 

8 

(( 

Eoberts,  Hugh 

1752 

1759 

u 

Eoberts,  Hugh 

1761 

1762 

ij  ^ 

Strettell,  Amos 

1752 

1753 

1 

(( 

Saunders,  Joseph 

1763 

1765 

2 

u 

Sayre,  John 

1757 

1758 

1 

u 

Sims,  Buckridge 

1754 

1756 

2 

u 

Shoemaker,  San^uel 

1758 

1759 

Ul4 

a 

Shoemaker,  Samuel 

1766 

1779 

13  j 

Shoemaker,  Jacob,  Jr., 

1764 

1787 

23 

u 

Smith,  William 

1836 

1861 

25 

u 

Sparks,  James 

1782 

1784 

2 

(( 

Stretch,  Joseph 

1757 

1766 

9 

u 

Stretch,  Thomas 

1758 

1761 

3 

C( 

Syng,  Philip 

1752 

1754 

2 

(( 

Swift,  Joseph 

1844 

1871 

27 

u 

Thompson,  Jonah 

1820 

1827 

7 

u 

Towers,  Eobert 

1784 

1792 

8 

li 

Thompson,  John  J. 

1873 

1875 

2 

u 

Wells,  Gideon  H. 

1796 

1803 

7 

u 

Wells,  Eichard 

1778 

1796 

18 

u 

West,  William 

1760 

1761 

1 

(( 

Wetherill,  Samuel 

1765 

1778 

13 

(( 

Wain,  Lewis 

1838 

1864 

26 

u 

Watkins,  Joseph 

1755 

1758 

3 

u 

Watson,  Joseph 

1816 

1841 

25 

u 

Wister,  Bartholomew 

1795 

1796 

1 

cc 

Willing,  Dr.  Charles 

1841 

Wharton,  Thomas 

1759 

1767 

8 

a 

Williams,  Henry  J. 

1846 

1873 

27 

u 

Welsh,  John 

1866 

Wister,  William 

1871 

Zane,  Jonathan 

1752 

1753 

1 

u 

) 


I 

77 

TKEASUEEIiS. 


TREASURERS. 

. From 

To 

Term  of  Service. 

John  Smith, 

1752 

1756 

4 years. 

James  Pemberton, 

1756 

1760 

4 ‘‘ 

Isaac  Greenleafe, 

1760 

1771 

11  ‘‘ 

James  Pemberton, 

1771 

1776 

5 “ 

Samuel  Sansom, 

1776 

1807 

31 

Caleb  Carmalt, 

1807 

1817 

10  “ 

CLEEKS. 


CLERKS. 

From 

To 

Term  of  Service. 

Joseph  Saunders, 

1752 

1754 

2 years. 

Kobert  Owen, 

1754 

1768 

15  “ 

John  Langdale, 

1768 

1769 

1 “ 

Matthew  Clarkson, 

1769 

1776 

8 ‘‘ 

Caleb  Carmalt, 

1776 

1817  • 

42 

SECEETAEY 

AND  TEEASUEEE. 

SECRETARY  AND  TREASURER. 

From 

To 

Term  of  Service. 

Joseph  S.  Lewis.  Elected 
25th  Nov.,  1817.  Lied 

1817 

1836 

19  years. 

March,  1836. 

Edw.  Pennington.  Elected 
16th  March,  1836.  Ee- 

1836 

1842 

6 “ 

signed  6th  Jan.,  1842, 
James  S.  Smith.  Elected 
12th  Jan,,  1842.  Ee 

1842 

1859 

17  “ 

signed  May  18,  1859. 
Jas.  Somers  Smith.  Elected 
May  18,  1859. 

1859 

IN  MEMORIAM. 


HON.  HORACE  BINNEY. 


[Extract  from  the  Minutes  of  “ The  Philadelphia  Contributionship  for 
the  Insurance  of  Houses  from  Loss  by  Fire.”] 

At  the  Stated  Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors, 
held  at  the  office,  No.  212  South  Fourth  Street,  at 
12  o’clock,  noon,  August  18,  1875,  Dr.  Charles  Wil- 
ling presented  and  read  the  following  preamble  and 
resolution,  viz. : \ 

Since  the  last  meeting  of  the  Board,  an  event  has 
occurred,  which,  though  in  the  course  of  nature  long 
impending,  we  had  all  fondly  hoped  might  be  yet  for 
some  time  delayed.  On  the  12th  of  August  the  Hon. 
Horace  Binney  died  at  his  residence,  at  the  advanced 
age  of  ninety-five  years.  Although  for  some  time 
previous  to  his  death  his  official  relation  to  this  cor- 
poration had  ceased,  in  consequence  of  the  resignation 
of  his  position  as  a Director  and  our  Chairman,  yet 
his  long  connection  with  its  affairs,  and  the  interest 
he  continued  to  manifest  in  its  welfare,  confer  on  us 
the  privilege  of  expressing,  as  a body,  the  very  high 
respect  and  honor  in  wffiich  he  was  held  by  every 
member  of  this  Board.  Therefore, 

Resolved:  That  the  Board  of  Directors  of  The 
Philadelphia  Contrihutionship^  have  heard  with  pro- 
found regret  of  the  death  of  the  Hon.  Horace  Binney, 


who  had  been  associated  with  this  corporation  forty- 
one  years,  having  been  first  elected  a Director,  April 
15,  1817,  and  resigned  in  1819;  being  again  elected 
a Director,  July  6,  1831,  and  chosen  as  Chairman, 
August  7,  1844,  continuing  to  officiate  as  Chairman 
during  a period  of  twenty-six  years,  until  his  relation 
to  the  Company  was  terminated  by  his  resignation, 
December  28,  1870,  this  being  the  latest  official  posi- 
tion that  he  maintained  in  connection  with  any  public 
body.  That  they  cannot  forget  the  invaluable  service, 
which,  during  this  long  period,  he  rendered  by  his 
sound  judgment  and  wise  council,  to  which,  in  a very 
great  degree,  the  present  prosperity  of  the  corporation 
is  to  be  ascribed. 

That  they  desire  to  express  the  very  high  respect 
and  honor  with  which  they  regarded  one  in  whom 
great  intellectual  capacity,  uniting  with  the  grandest 
moral  qualities,  composed  a character  which  impressed, 
by  its  power  and  excellence,  all  who  came  within  its 
influence.  A character  whose  completeness  was  as 
marked  as  it  was  rare.  A judgment  so  clear  and  I 
searching  that  every  subject  submitted  to  it  resolved 
itself  into  its  true  proportions ; an  imagination  subject 
to  the  reason,  yet  giving  force  and  glow  to  its  expres- 
sion ; a comprehensive  grasp  combined  with  a faithful 
accuracy  in  the  conduct  of  all  the  affairs  committed 
to  his  care,  and  a supreme  moral  courage ; such,  that, 
when  convinced  of  the  right,  no  external  influence, 
however  powerful,  could  for  one  instant  deter  him  from 
its  assertion  and  maintenance.  The  exercise  of  his 


msa 


great  powers  was  not  confined  to  individual  gratifi- 
cation, or  the  service  of  personal  friendship;  but  when 
occasion  presented,  they  were  freely  used  for  the 
benefit  of  his  country,  and  of  the  community  in  which 
he  lived.  His  fellow-citizens  had  learned  to  feel  that 
in  every  hour  of  anxiety  and  danger,  either  in  private 
or  public  affairs,  there  existed  a refuge  where  the 
wisest  and  bravest  counsel  might  be  sought,  and  would 
be  given. 

A cultivated  and  elegant  scholar ; a profound  and 
learned  lawyer,  to  whom  the  members  of  his  profes- 
sion acknowledged  none  superior ; a most  accomplished 
gentleman ; the  crowning  grace  of  his  grand  and  yet 
finely  moulded  character  was  the  deep,  sincere,  earnest 
faith  of  a Christian ; a faith  in  which  lay  the  secret 
of  the  consistency,  the  purity,  the  courage,  and  the 
strength  which  ennobled  his  long  and  honored  life. 

That  while  they  mourn  for  themselves  an  irreparable 
loss,  they  desire  to  offer  their  most  fervent  and  respect- 
ful sympathy  to  those  who,  in  his  departure  from  this 
world,  have  undergone  yet  deeper  bereavement. 

When,  on  motion  of  John  Welsh,  Esq.,  they  were 
unanimously  adopted. 

On  motion  of  George  C.  Morris,  Esq.,  it  was  resolved 
that  the  preamble  and  resolutions  be  entered  at  length 
on  the  minutes,  and  that  a copy  of  them  be  sent  to 
the  family  of  the  Hon.  Horace  Binney;  also  that  they 
be  published. 

Charles  Willing,  chairman. 

Jas.  Somers  Smith,  Secretary. 


J9imtors 


^•U-Q-XTST  18,  18 

William  H.  Hart, 

Dr.  Charles  Willing, 

Eichard  P.  Lardner, 

Dr.  J.  Eodman  Paul, 

Adolph  E.  Borie, 

Alexander  Biddle, 


Secretary  and  Treasurer, 

James  Somers  Smith. 


7 5. 

John  Welsh, 

Joseph  Price, 
William  Wister, 
George  C.  Morris, 
Alexander  Henry, 
Franklin  B.  Gowen. 


/»./  ■ 


' . f. 


: •• 


,'  I,, . 

‘'vW' 


) ■ ■ •-  M ■•  I 


, '■■ 


V'  .:.t'^' ' • 


Vif 


4-y-' 


- 

J'  . 


-I 


l»;  ;• 

M 'i 


-v^i: 


' ^'  . ■ ,:v  . -J-  . ’ ' ‘.V-'’-y-Jvi 


- ■ .f  ■.  t‘*  ■ 


3 ri^i 
-A' PL* 


■■'  ' ‘I 


I'  4\  , 


»«!■  -4’ 


ir^-r  ■' 

I-  '* 


f::  ;-'-  -'vVr-'  •" 

«'■•  . '.■•  •♦•••■^1?  . ,•  V,  :v.-l' 


i 


*‘%5  ' ■.•■ 


■v*;--  .■■> 


:f  ■■ 


- . . V 'j.-'  ■ '■  ■ ■ ;j|;  ■ . \ ■ • ' '.f/l 't-  " ■■''■; 

^^‘i.PX-Tvii'vv  ; ■ ’y  X-  •#>■  ■ • ■ 'M-,  ' .'  •■ 

;■  ..  --S'  ?-  ..'  -^'v 


i^:rm 


.444' jj. 


^ ■ i'"' 


Sr;  - ■ r 


.t>; 

V’^v 


' ' ,.;'’V';^'■ 

I (' . ' '■  ■•  '■ 


y ' ' 


.■ 

'fe-  ,;,  *3  •. 


r'!-  * , ■ 


■ C.  •^■V  .*.' 


• ?. 


%■  ■■  _ ;‘  .v  _ 


• .,  *IV#  ■.  J : 


■•■■:’  ■•'•?  X''" 

■ . 

• 4^  :u  i.  .^4r-  ^ _ ■ ■ - 


' ^ V-  V-  ■ ■ V =• 


■■  ■.■i 


, ' 


/ 


' / '/^c. 


-CJ 


""-V/ 


' y ' y^  ^y  <h  yy  y^ ,'  y^  'y'^ 


^yyy  y y yyy''  ' ^ y,  /^'.^y,yf^/‘'y'%y  . '. 

y^  ^^y-r  y'  ^ ^ ^ 

^ ' "'J^yy  ' ''''^'^yyyy:^'^'y-'^y'  yy-/ , ' 'y> 


'yy' 

^y^y  ''"' 


'y/'  'yy 


